1. Brief history of the Volga Tatars
There are two large groups of Tatars on the territory of our Union. One of them, the most significant, is concentrated within the Tatar Republic on the Volga, the other, small, on the Crimean Peninsula in the Crimean Autonomous Republic; (both republics are part of the RSFSR) Of these two Tatar groups, of course, special attention should be paid to the Volga Tatars, or, as they are called, Kazan Tatars, since this more numerous and distinctive group has always been the center and hotbed of the national Tatar culture and Under the heavy pressure of tsarist oppression and Russification, she was able to forge the will to fight for liberation. The ancestry of the Volga Tatars is usually derived from the Turkic tribes who came from Central Asia much earlier than the 10th century and settled on the middle reaches of the Volga. These tribes are known under the name of the Kama-Volga Bulgars. Subsequently, the Finnish tribes, who had lived here before, were added to them, completely submitting to the influence of the stronger Bulgar culture. The Bulgar state was agricultural and commercial in nature, it had fertile soil, fur animals, fish wealth and lay at the junction of large trade routes to the southeast to Persia, Mesopotamia and Central Asia, to the Urals and Siberia, as well as to southwest, to the Dnieper and the Black Sea. Further, by the XIII century, the Bulgar kingdom was captured by a wave of the Mongol flood that spread far to the west. The Mongol tribe — the Tatars — destroyed the capital of the kingdom, the city of Bulgar, but the Bulgar statehood and culture did not disappear, but, on the contrary, absorbed the victors of the Tatars. This is how the Kazan Khanate was formed with a new capital, Kazan. The Muslim Kazan Khanate was a natural transit point and trade intermediary between the growing Moscow principality and the East; Therefore, by the end of the XIV century, there is already a strong and developed trading capital, the representative of which was the Tatar aristocracy: princes, murzas, beks, etc. The wealth of Kazan, accumulated as a result of a developed and brisk transit trade, attracted the attentive gaze of the expanding Moscow state , moving step by step to the north-west: to the free trade cities of Novgorod and Pskov, and to the east: to the Volga and the Caspian Sea. In 1552, Kazan, after a long desperate struggle, was taken by the troops of Ivan the Terrible and an independent and strong khanate became an integral part of Muscovite Rus. Of course, Moscow seized the Kazan Khanate not in order to care about the prosperity and welfare of the Tatar people. The Moscow ruling elite — the boyars — immediately set about unrestrained plunder of the newly conquered country for the purpose of profit. The Tatar population is driven from their ancestral lands to the worst areas, giving way to the winners. Gradually, the process of formation of the Russian landowning aristocracy is under way, ousting the Tatar landowners, who are rushing into the sphere of trade, which is still relatively free. Russian settlement in Tatarstan, just like in other, subsequently captured areas of the East, is under the slogan of spreading Christianity and eradicating Islam. The monasteries and churches that have appeared here, the number of which is growing every year, become hotbeds of Russification (x) policy and oppression of the native Muslim population; at the same time they are large landowners, seizing the best lands and shamelessly exploiting the Tatar peasantry. The history of the tsarist policy in Tatarstan for about 4 centuries is a continuous list of the illegalities of persecution and abuse of the Muslim population. Russian administrators and bishops, especially until the 19th century, systematically practice the forcible conversion of the Tatars to Christianity, the destruction of mosques and the planting of Orthodox churches, offending the religious feelings of Muslims, etc. Of course, this religious fanaticism was only a cover for the true aspirations of Russian colonists, who were trying not to deserve so much "Salvation of the soul", how much to pursue their class, deeply material interests. The greatest burden of the tsarist regime fell on the working masses of Tartary. While the upper classes, through various compromises, often converting to Christianity, bought themselves immunity, creating a group of the Tatar nobility - the support of the existing system - the masses, especially the peasantry, were provided- ') Russification forcible Russification here of the Russian landowning aristocracy, ousting Tatar landowners who rush into the sphere of trade, which is still relatively free. Russian settlement in Tatarstan, just like in other, subsequently captured areas of the East, is under the slogan of spreading Christianity and eradicating Islam. The monasteries and churches that have appeared here, the number of which is growing every year, become hotbeds of Russification (x) policy and oppression of the native Muslim population; at the same time, they are also large landowners, seizing the best lands and shamelessly exploiting the Tatar peasant in. The history of the tsarist policy in Tatarstan for about 4 centuries is a continuous list of the illegalities of persecution and abuse of the Muslim population. Russian administrators and bishops, especially until the 19th century, systematically practice the forcible conversion of the Tatars to Christianity, the destruction of mosques and the planting of Orthodox churches, offending the religious feelings of Muslims, etc. Of course, this religious fanaticism was only a cover for the true aspirations of Russian colonists, who were trying not to deserve so much "Salvation of the soul", how much to pursue their class, deeply material interests. The greatest burden of the tsarist regime fell on the working masses of Tartary. While the upper classes, through various compromises, often converting to Christianity, bought themselves immunity, creating a group of the Tatar nobility — the support of the existing system — the masses, especially the peasantry, were left to the arbitrariness of the tsarist administrators. In Catherine's era, the Russian authorities quite often practiced the unauthorized imposition of natural and monetary taxes on the Tatar peasantry, free exploitation of peasant labor, etc. The downtrodden and intimidated Tatars could not complain about the arbitrariness of the authorities, and anyway it would be useless, since in on the rare occasions when such complaints were filed, they were ignored. In later eras, up to the last days of tsarism, the oppression of the Tatars continued as before, except in slightly modified ways. Most of all, the Russian authorities were afraid of the penetration of the Tatar masses of literacy and education, which would undoubtedly open the eyes of the native population and awaken in it the spirit of protest and struggle against Russian despotism. In their desire to suppress any national identity of the Tatars, Russian administrators tried to drag the Tatars from Muslim schools (madrasah) to Russian schools specially established by the government, where native children could be properly processed in a spirit pleasing to the theorists of Russian chauvinism. To guide this Russification work to the East! and in particular, officials who were educated in Russian orientalist educational institutions were dispatched to Tatarstan. Particularly distinguished in this field was a certain Nikolsky, who developed in detail a plan for staging the Russification work. Nikolsky's plan, reflecting the views of the tsarist bureaucracy on the Eastern peoples as the lowest despised race, involves the establishment of a special newspaper in the Tatar language called "Bahr-ul-Akhbar". (Sea of ​​news), which could distract the Tatar masses from nationalist sentiments and process them in a direction beneficial to Russia. This kind of "agitprop" of the tsarist bureaucracy in Tatarstan, however, gave very little results. On the contrary, the system of religious oppression, russification and the forcible imposition of Orthodoxy, strengthened among the Tatars loyalty to Islam and the desire for rapprochement with other Muslim peoples. At the same time, revolutionary sentiments, spontaneous discontent and anger arose among the peasant masses of Tatarstan, who were infinitely oppressed by the willful administrators and exploited by the landowners. Therefore, the Tatar peasantry responded so quickly and sympathetically to popular uprisings against tsarism, which seized the Volga region. So it was under Stepan Razin, so it was in the Pugachev era. Popular unrest in certain areas or villages took place at the end of the last century; such are, for example, the riots that broke out in 1878 in several villages of the Spassky and Kazan districts, as a result of the Russification measures of the authorities and extortions from the kulaks and landowners. As a rule, Russian officials liquidated such outbreaks in a quick and tried-and-true way: a punitive expedition and flogging until they lost consciousness. As we have already noted, after the Russian conquest, the Tatar land nobility in the majority rushed into the sphere of trade, mainly intermediary between European Russia and Central Asia. Thus, by the end of the 19th century, there was already a fairly significant trading bourgeoisie in Kazan, and the accumulated capital was gradually invested in local industry, giving rise to a real factory proletariat. The Tatar big bourgeoisie and the higher Tatar intelligentsia that emerged from it were in opposition to tsarism and its national policy. However, this dissatisfaction went very close, confined to the framework of the Cadet party. In the history of Tatarstan since the time of the Russian conquest, this extreme moderation of the upper classes of the Tatar population can be traced several times. Even under Pugachev, the Tatar merchants *, generally opposed to the government, frightened by the growth of the peasant movement, actively began to help the authorities suppress the revolt. In the era of the 1905 revolution ', while the Tatar workers, led by the Bolshevik Party, took part in the struggle against tsarism, the Tatar bourgeoisie, aristocracy and clergy expressed "patriotic feelings" the throne. Finally, after October, when Kazan was in the hands of the White Guard and Czechoslovak troops, the Tatar bourgeoisie was with them. Nevertheless, the slogans of the October Revolution prevailed in Tatarstan, the Tatar masses followed the revolution and the Kazan province of the Russian Empire became the Tatar Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic.

2. Soviet Tatarstan
The Tatrespublika was formed on May 27, 1920 from parts of the territory of the provinces: Kazan, Ufa, Samara and Ulyanovsk (former Simbirsk). The territory of the newly formed republic covers an area of ​​65.587 sq. klm. Of the total population of its equal to 2.925.000 people, the Tatars make up 1.306.242 people (it should be noted that several million Volga Tatars live in various localities outside the Tatrespublika); followed by Russians at 1.205.814, Bashkirs — 139.858, Chuvash — 183.896. Administratively, the Tatrespublika is divided into 12 districts, the so-called cantons: Arsky — 19 volosts, Laishevsky — 3 volosts, Yelabuzhsky — 7, Buinsky — 7, Tyutyushsky — 7, Menzelinsky — 3, Chistopolsky — 17, Mamadyshsky — 9 , Spassky — 8, Bugulminsky — 14, Sviyazhsky — 8, Chelninsky — 11. The republic is mainly an agricultural country. Of the 2.925.090 of its population, the rural population is 2.659.400 people ', i.e. more than 90%, with the bulk of the Tatar working population concentrated in agriculture. The middle Volga region, within which Tatarstan is located, lies in the transition zone from a strip of forests to a steppe strip. Here, fields and meadows alternate with huge and dense forests and groves; prevailing trees in forests: spruce, fir, pine, birch, aspen, elm, ash. From | grain crops mainly grow here, rye, wheat and oats; flax and hemp are widespread industrial crops. The Soviet government of Tatarstan first of all set about giving land to the Tatar and Russian peasants, who suffered severely from land shortages in the pre-revolutionary era .. However, the years of the imperialist and civil war, which severed a huge number of workers and undermined the welfare of the peasant economy, significantly reduced the sown area of ​​Tatarstan. The domination of the White Guards, the Constituents, the Czecho-Slovaks, etc., who shamelessly robbed the peasants, and the kaleidoscopic change of regimes, had an especially hard impact on the Tatar countryside. Alongside! with this in 1921 the Volga region experienced an almost unprecedented crop failure. As a result, a terrible year of famine begins in Tatrespubly-ke, which wrested a colossal number of victims from among the local peasant population, especially the poor Tatar population. The famine year further undermined the peasant economy already destroyed by the war. In 1922. The sown area of ​​the republic was 1,031,765 dessiatines, decreasing by 42p / 0 against 1920, and by 6O ° / o against 1916. In addition, the peasantry had almost no seeds for sowing, which threatened a further reduction in the sown area and, consequently, a recurrence of famine. Only thanks to energetic measures taken with due speed by the Soviet government, Tatarstan was saved from the troubles that threatened it and began to gradually recover from the troubles already experienced. Already by the end of 1924 the sown area from 1.031.765 in 1920 increased to 1.789.671 dess. Along with this, peasant implements are improving, and the number of workers and cattle is increasing, which has become extremely thinner in previous years. Now the Republic of Tatarstan is gradually striving for further intensification of agriculture. We see already developed agronomic assistance, experienced nurseries, demonstration state farms, a number of measures in the field of reclamation, a gradual transition from three-field to multi-field crop rotation, sorting of seeds for sowing, etc. In recent years, the spread of truck farming has been noticed; before, almost exclusively the Russian population was engaged in gardening, but now it is developing among the Tatars, taught by the bitter experience of a hungry year. Along with this, technical crops have made a step forward. There is no doubt that the intensification of agriculture is proceeding at a somewhat slower pace, the reasons for this lie in those forms of land management that have been inherited from the past, such as a strip of land, far-land, small-land, etc. hinder the transition to multi-field. But on the other hand, the successes already achieved and the growth of the well-being of the peasantry during the years of Soviet power give full reason to hope for a quick overcoming of these difficulties. The industry of Tatrespu is concentrated mainly in Kazan; there are tanneries, soap-making, chemical factories, sewing and textile factories. In the cantons, the flour-grinding industry is predominantly developed, numbering about 100 mills. The gradual development of the industry of Tatarstan and the increase in its production, observed during the years of the revolution, contribute to the expansion of the personnel of the local industrial proletariat. In 1925, the number of workers employed in production was 6,572 people, of which 24.38о / о were Tatars. In this way, The process of industrial development of the region is gradually drawing the Tatar peasantry into production more and more, thereby undermining the roots of the old life of the Tatar village, rebuilding the family structure and the position of the Tatar woman in a new way. The industry of the Republic of Tatarstan is mainly in the hands of the state; private capital predominantly develops activities in the field of small trade, which has long been widespread among the Tatars. The policy of the Soviet government of Tataria in relation to the Tatar population and its culture is a clear opposite of the traditional policy of Russian tsarism. Instead of fierce Russification, religious fanaticism, and disdain for the Tatars as a lower race, we now have an attentive and careful attitude towards the Tatar national culture and its further development. The Tatar language, formerly in the pen, has now become the state language, along with Russian. Tatar children receive education at school in their native language and are gradually freed from the power of the Muslim clergy, races. expanding their horizons and knowledge. Currently, in Soviet Tatarstan, a number of publications are published in the Tatar and Russian languages, covering the most important issues of politics, Soviet construction, the national economy of the republic, the life of the derenny, the trade union movement, work among women, etc. Tatar Communist University in Kazan, including the Tatars and Russians and representatives of national minorities, prepares qualified workers for local administrative institutions, public organizations and economic agencies who, being connected by thousands of threads with the working masses of the republics, will successfully lead the cause of socialist construction .. Soviet Tatarstan from the era of oppression and national humiliation is moving to a new system and a new way of life.

3. Tatarka before October
The system of national oppression of the Tatar people, the difficult economic conditions of the Tatar working masses, their oppression, darkness and lack of culture in the era of tsarism, delayed the development of the Tatars and created their own settled way of life here, constrained by the conservative norms of Islam and "Sharia". As already mentioned, national and religious the policy of Russian administrators in most cases achieved the opposite results. The Tatar masses held on to their identity even more firmly and protected the inviolability of the Muslim culture, way of life and customs from foreign influences. The Muslim clergy enjoyed tremendous influence and authority and were the guardian of the laws and rules of Sharia. With the development of revolutionary sentiments among the Tatars, the clergy begins to play a clearly reactionary role, opposing all new trends and turns into an agent of Russian tsarism in its struggle against the liberation movement. One of the cornerstones of the old Muslim way of life is the family structure and the position of women. Just like among other Muslim peoples, the Tatar woman occupied a servile position; social life, education, the possibility of independent work and existence were tightly closed for her. If before the revolution there is some kind of turning point in this sense for a woman from the upper circles of the city, the village continues to sleep like death until the October Revolution. Even now, despite the persistent and long work of the party and the authorities in the field of restructuring life, its vestiges still survived in the Tatar village. Tatar villages are usually located in river valleys at a short distance from one another, along the banks. Getting into a Tatar village, you immediately feel a special oriental flavor that distinguishes it from Russian villages. The buildings here do not follow the same straight line crossed by the transverse streets; they are scattered randomly, now piling up on top of each other, now forming wide and empty holes x). Streets along the east are narrow and crooked, bending in frequent alleys, turns and dead ends. Houses don't go straight out into the street; they stand in the back of a courtyard lined with greenery and fenced in. Fence, i.e. its appearance, here can serve as a sign that determines the degree of prosperity of its owner. If it is carefully and carefully knitted together, decorated in abundance with carvings and variegatedly painted, then this means that you are in front of the court of a Tatar rich man or mullah; among the middle peasants, the view of the fence is much more modest, and the poor population loafs around it somehow and does not care about pomp. In a Tatar peasant family, as in the rest of the East, a girl does not enjoy such privileges as a boy. The cherished desire of most parents expecting a child, especially their first child, is to have a boy; having a girl in such cases is disappointing. From the earliest years, the Tatar peasant girl began to get used to her destiny: to be the property, the thing of a man, cut off from any opportunity to get the right to independence or simply to personal life. From now on and until the end of her life, her only duties were reduced to children, kitchen, washing clothes and other household and field work. In more prosperous families, the girl, of course, does not do all this black work; there she lives a monotonous, dreary, animal life. 'When she reaches the age at which, according to the Sharia, she should get married, the parents begin to look for a suitable groom. B most cases, matchmaking was carried out without the participation of young people, exclusively through negotiations between parents; in the same cases, when matchmaking was the result of mutual love between already familiar young people, the custom obliges the groom to act through the parents, without whose will the marriage was impossible. The Tatars' matchmaking ceremony was approximately as follows. The groom's parents send the matchmaker or matchmaker to the bride's parents, mostly to the father. A long conversation is being conducted here, starting from afar and only then moving on to its direct goal. The matchmaker, on behalf of the groom, negotiates the size of the "kalym". Kalym is a customary ransom given by the groom for the concession of the bride to him. This custom, whose roots go back to the most ancient times of nomadic life, in itself is a reflection of the slavish position of women among the Tatars. The marriage here is not a free union between a boy and a girl, but simply the purchase of a wife. It is bought as a thing, as a household item. After talking with the matchmaker, the bride's father consults with his wife and then both of them negotiate with the daughter. Of course, everything goes well if the young were already familiar with each other and had already decided everything among themselves. But there are often cases when a girl does not know her betrothed at all or does not feel any attraction to him. Then it is a real tragedy for her, because the will of her family is unshakable and undeniable. It should be noted that among the poor, marriage was arranged much easier, since here the material calculation of the parents played less important, except for the occurrence of those cases when a well-to-do man wooed a poor girl. In wealthy peasant families and among urban merchants, marriage was mostly a bargain. After the matter has been settled in principle, the lengthy preparations for the wedding begin. During all this time, the young do not see each other. The groom sends gifts to the bride, she, in turn, prepares gifts for the groom: usually, these are embroidered towels for washing the face and hands and wedding onuchi (ayakchuu On the day appointed for the wedding, all guests go to the groom and from there they go with him to the bride's house, where they are met by her parents and some of the guests.The bride remains in her room with several women, most often old aunts, awaiting the arrival of the groom.First, several men, playing the role of witnesses, enter her and ask her once again whether she would agree to be a wife and, according to custom, she is silent until the question is repeated three times and only then gives an affirmative answer.Finally, the groom is brought into the room and then, finally, the formal acquaintance of the young is made, after which the strangers leave, leaving the bride and groom alone. after the mullah, according to all the prescriptions of Muslim custom, marries the young, the groom usually stays with the bride for several days dedicated to the wedding. irestham. This custom, however, takes place only in wealthy homes. After these days, the groom takes the bride to his house, where she begins a new phase of her life, which lasts until her death. The appearance of a Tatar woman, both a peasant woman and a city woman from the middle classes, until recent years retained all the features of the national Tatar type, sharply distinguishing her from the neighboring Russian peasant women, The style of clothing and jewelry of the Tatar woman remained unchanged for centuries, and only the revolution, accompanied by the involvement of women in industry, the destruction of the previous foundations of family life and religious prejudices, began to gradually displace the national costume, replacing it with a more comfortable conventional clothes. On the other hand, even before the revolution, some Europeanization of the costume took place among the women of the upper Tatar bourgeoisie, who followed the path of Russification. This costume looks like this. All women from a very young age to a ripe old age wear long, closed dresses with long sleeves. These dresses for wealthier women are made of chintz, for the poor they are made of homespun linen and are painted in different colors, while older women have more colorful coloring. Under the dress, Tatar women wear wide trousers, but Turkish women differ from wide trousers and do not look out from under the dress, and a special bib, a doll. According to custom, a Tatar woman is never shown without a headdress. However, a Tatar woman does not wear a veil or a burqa; she usually ties her head with a handkerchief, and when she leaves the house, she puts a large kerchief over it, the ends of which fall on her chest. Sometimes older women put on a small cap over the headscarf, while young girls tie the headscarf not on the chin, but across the forehead on the back of the head, leaving their ears open; on holidays, however, they wear caps, covering them with a scarf when leaving. Of the jewelry worn by a Tatar woman, the most common and typical are bracelets, mostly silver, a bracelet, that is, an adornment made up of large silver coins, woven into a braid on a cord, and earrings, also extremely popular among Tatars. It should also be noted that Tatar women are very fond of various cosmetics to decorate the face. The majority of Tatar women, from bourgeois urban women to peasant women, always paint their faces; then usually Tatar women resort to eyebrow tinting, and in more prosperous layers this is done with the help of antimony contained in special bottles, and women more poorer replace antimony with simple pencils; finally, very often nails are painted red, and married women even paint their teeth black *). When a Tatar woman gets married, especially a peasant woman, there comes a time of lifelong seclusion. Her only duty is to obey her husband's will meekly and accurately; The only circle of her activities is chores around the house. A married Tatar woman in a poor and middle-class house devotes the whole day to the housekeeping, babysitting the children, cooking, sewing, washing clothes, cleaning the yard and the hut. She is in a hurry to do everything on time, otherwise her husband may severely punish her. If he is harsh in nature, then the punishment is very heavy. The woman in these cases was completely helpless and left to the complete arbitrariness of her master. Tsarist laws did not care at all about protecting her personality; about protecting her from male autocracy and despotism. Quite often, even the husband's murder of his wife remained without consequences, thanks to the dull formalism of the authorities, who adhered to the letter of the law. An old Tatar public figure, Comrade Abrui Saifi, tells a very interesting fact that clearly illustrates the degree of enslavement of a Tatar woman in the family and her defenselessness from insecurity. her husband's arbitrary will. In 1910, in one of the villages of the former Chistopol district, the husband, returning home, did not receive dinner on time, then he, ruined by this disobedience, poured boiling water over the unfortunate woman, after which she died in terrible agony. When Abrui Saifi, who decided to punish the murderer, went to court, they refused to accept her complaint on the grounds that she herself was not the victim or her closest relative. Of course, with such an attitude of the authorities, husbands could calmly continue their abuse of the wife's personality and even carry out savage reprisals against her to please their tyranny, like the one just described. In well-to-do peasant or bourgeois urban Tatar families, women had less hard and dirty housework. But even there, a woman's life was very unenviable. A Tatar woman had to live in a separate half, dragging out a monotonous, viscous existence. She rarely left the house; when guests came to her husband, she usually did not show herself to them. It was especially hard for a young married Tatar woman if her marriage was not concluded for love. She had to bury herself forever, without any hope of personal happiness. Cheating on her husband in the old Tatar way of life built on Sharia law was considered a grave crime; however, according to Sharia law, divorce on the initiative of the wife was unacceptable. Finally, mention should be made of the terrible antihygienic conditions that were so disastrously reflected on the body of the Tatar woman, ruining many lives. The Tatar city woman resorted to the help of doctors, while the peasant woman almost never. Dirty healers with irresponsible ease did their job, often ending in death from childbirth or disease. It was not possible to engage in social activities, science or even just independent work. Women were usually little involved even in field work; This partly explains the fact that among the Tatar population there was so little developed gardening, which is mainly the lot of women. The only job available to a woman in the conditions of this reclusive existence was needlework. Just like in ancient Russia in the era of terem life, or in women's monasteries, needlework in Tataria reached a high stage of development. Artistic homespun products: tablecloths, towels, napkins and gold embroidery of various tubes, caps, shoes, etc., made by Tatar women, were brought directly to perfection. Seclusion killed all her energy and independence in a woman, belittled her, reduced her to a degree some kind of pet. The road to education was closed for women. They were not allowed in the men's madrasah. There were special women's schools for them; in fact, these were not schools, but simply special female teachers gathered groups of girls at home, taught them to read in Tatar and Arabic, analyzed chapters from the Koran with them and taught them about some issues of the Muslim religion. On this, the education of the Tatar girl was cut short. She was not taught to write, considering it an unnecessary luxury. The revolution of 1905 was the strong impetus that pushed forward the cause of women's liberation. As a result of the shift that has taken place in Tatarstan, a new social movement is emerging with a liberal tint. Its participants were representatives of a small Tatar intelligentsia who had visited more cultured Muslim countries: Turkey, Syria, Egypt, etc. They dreamed of creating a new Muslim culture, of adapting the norms and prescriptions of the Koran to modern life, to their environment, of reconciliation and the fusion of Islam with European civilization. Tatar writers, thinkers and public figures of the new formation strove to spread enlightenment among the backward Tatar masses, to get rid of those ugly remnants of a conservative life that were still there. Of course, this wave of progressive ideas also touched the women's issue. In addition to the male madrasah, opened in the village of Bobin, Sarapul district, Vyatka province, in which, along with teaching the Koran and theology, classes in various secular sciences were conducted, a special female madrasah was opened, led by one educated woman, Mukhlissa. The male madrasah attracted young Muslims from the most remote regions, just as the female madrasah became the center of women's education among the Tatars. The secular sciences were taught here according to Turkish textbooks and their teaching was led mostly by people educated in Turkey. Both of these schools did not last long. The autocracy was terrified of the spread of enlightenment among the masses and the slightest sign of the awakening of a social movement, and, moreover, Turkish influence among Russian Muslims; therefore, by order of the authorities, both schools were closed. However, it should be noted that the activities of these Muslim progressives can far from claim to be revolutionary.  In essence, they all remained captive to religious prejudices and, speaking only for some partial reforms, did not dare to break with a number of deeply reactionary and ridiculous Sharia institutions. In particular, this was the case with women. One of the prominent representatives of this movement publishes the book "Reconciliation of Polygamy with Hygiene", in which he justifies the Muslim custom of polygamy with the physiological characteristics of men who constantly feel the need for a woman's physical intimacy, while the latter has periods in which such closeness is unacceptable. Another such theologian and writer Musa Bigiev, in his work Fundamentals of Sharia, discussing the appropriateness of the custom of covering a woman's face from male gaze, comes to a curious way out: according to hygiene requirements, the face can be open, but the head and hands should be closed to the hands. Such was the half-heartedness of the first Tatar reformers. However, there is no doubt that a certain shift in the sense of the growth of enlightenment aspirations and even some softening of family tyranny after the 1905 revolution was evident. This shift affected mainly the urban Tatar population, and even then not all, but mainly its bourgeois part. Rich Tatars, on the one hand, still fearfully looking back and fawning at the Muslim clergy, at the same time begin to send their daughters to Russian gymnasiums; some indulgences are allowed in the sense of marriage, in which the daughter's personal desire is already a little taken into account, etc. At the same time, there is a growing thirst of Tatar women for education, for social activity, which already captures wider circles of women. In this regard, men from the urban intelligentsia are gradually beginning to look at a woman with different eyes, discovering valuable human dignity in her. As an echo of the growth of these moods among the Tatars, the famous Tatar novel entitled "The Beggar's Daughter", which began to appear in a Tatar newspaper in 1906, deserves attention. His heroine is the daughter of an old Nicholas soldier named Sagadat, who was left an orphan after the death of her father, who died of hunger and poverty. Sagadat, forced to beg, falls into the hands of a young Tatar merchant Abdulla Amirkhanov, who makes her his mistress, and soon abandons her. Then Sagadat sinks lower and lower and finally gets into a brothel. At the same time, Amirkhanov, having met a certain Mansur, a typical representative of the young Tatar intelligentsia, imbued with liberation ideas, succumbed to his influence and, repenting, together with his new friend searches for Sagadat. Despite the indignation and persecution of his relatives and friends, he marries Sagadat. However, the class essence of the young merchant soon made itself felt. During the Japanese war, for the purpose of profit, he becomes a supplier of products for the army and is completely imbued with the spirit of speculation. Sagadat, meanwhile, under the influence of Mansur, ardently strives for education and social activity. Agrarian riots that broke out everywhere do not affect the Amirkhanovs' estates, since the peasants value and love Sagadat for its simplicity, kindness and humanity. Amirkhanov, returning home, is dissatisfied with his wife's liberalism; he continues to treat the peasants harshly, who this time set fire to his estate. The rift in the relationship between spouses is growing. As a result, a break, after which Sagadat, having passed the exam for the matriculation certificate, leaves to study for courses. This novel is highly indicative of the shift in the Tatar public that 1905 brought with it. Here we already see a free and energetic woman, full of good intentions and the will to fight. At the same time, there are already attempts to elucidate the difference between the separate classes of the Tatar population and highlight the reactionary essence of the Tatar bourgeois; ZII. The next blow to the old way of life was dealt by the world war. Kits and mobilizations wrested all able-bodied men from the village. The entire burden of taking care of feeding the family fell on the women. Thus, the Tatar peasant woman ceases to be a passive, helpless creature and becomes the breadwinner of the family; accordingly, of course, her psychology also changes. Masses of peasants rush to work in the city. Women earning their own food on their own are no longer rare, but quite common. All this created the preconditions for! ' the birth of a genuine mass women's movement., The February Revolution is its starting point. In general, the position of the Tatar toiler after February almost did not change for the better, but nevertheless the women's movement received some freedom of action. More and more revolutionary sentiments are being spread among the female masses. In June 1917, there were serious unrest in Kazan among the working Tatar women. At the rally, representatives of the committee of Muslim soldiers are vigorously demanding an immediate end to the war. After the rally, the women go to the city council, seizing the workers and employees of shops along the way, and there they arrest the city head. This development of the mass movement has seriously alarmed the privileged groups of the Tatar population! and first of all, the Muslim clergy, who saw in him a threat to the centuries-old, patriarchal way of life and a social system based on Islam and Sharia. As a counterbalance, the organization of bourgeois and intellectual women's societies begins. These societies sought to improve the position of women within the bourgeois system; they remained unconditionally loyal to Islam and its precepts and campaigned for an end to class strife and the unification of women of all classes. The Tatar merchants and clergy not only did not oppose these organizations, but, on the contrary, openly helped and financed them. In April 1917, the 1st All-Russian Congress of Muslim Women was opened in Kazan, the overwhelming majority of which were precisely these very bourgeois intellectual elements. ... Naturally, the resolutions adopted at the congress were carried out in the same vague, indefinite tones, did not advance the cause of women's liberation a single step, and did not in any way improve the position of the Tatar toiler. Meanwhile, the truly revolutionary elements are organizing Muslim socialist committees, which are developing work among working women under the slogan of the power of the soviets and the proletarian revolution; under these committees are organized: a bureau of soldiers, a bureau of domestic servants, a society of women handicraftsmen (shapers, seamstresses, embroiderers, etc.). The socialist committees launch a fierce struggle against the reactionary Tatar bourgeoisie and Mel-lami. At the May All-Russian Congress of Muslims in Moscow, the revolutionary elements, despite the fierce opposition of the mullahs, achieved the adoption of resolutions demanding full women's equality, but at the next July All-Russian Congress, the clergy, supported by bourgeois intellectual groups, achieved the abolition of the resolutions of the previous congress ... This was followed by severe persecution and persecution of organizations of working Tatar women, by the clergy and the bourgeoisie, which stopped thanks to the October Revolution, which brought the Tatar toiler a real complete emancipation.
4. Women of Soviet Tatarstan
After the October Revolution, the working women of Tatarstan are more and more involved in the cause of the proletarian revolution and for the most part take the side of the Soviet regime. In a difficult era, when Tatarstan was flooded with White Guard detachments, which eradicated all traces of Sovietization with fire and sword, they met a certain hostility in the Tatar working masses. During the civil war, many Tatar workers actively fought in the revolutionary ranks against the whites. In 1919, Kazan organized the first holiday of the workers' day on March 8, in which many Tatar women participated. Even before the decree on the establishment of the Autonomous Republic of Tatarstan, the Muslim bureau of the Kazan Gubkom of the All-Union Communist Party of Bolsheviks was organizing a special section for work among working Tatars. After the formation of the Tatrespublika, the task of political education of Tatar women and drawing them into the ranks of the party is more and more improved and progressing. At the end of 1926, according to the party census, the regional party organization of the Tatrespublika had 10,282 members in its ranks, of which 1,273 were women, that is, 12.4 ° / o; since 1922, the number of women communists has quadrupled. In turn, along ethnic lines, they are divided as follows: Russians - 829, that is, 65.1 ° / 0; Tatars — 366, that is, 28% and other nationalities — 78, that is, 6.9%. Russian women who are part of the party are mostly workers and office workers, and Tatar women are mostly peasant women. However, it should be noted that the process of increasing the percentage of Tartars among the urban population during the years of Soviet power has increased enormously. The years that followed the imperialist and civil war, which, in addition to the general ruin of the peasant economy, brought with them an unprecedented poor harvest, moved even larger cadres of the rural population to work in the city. A large percentage of them were women who had lost their breadwinner. Then, as the Sovietization of Tatarstan deepened, we see a gradual decomposition of the old family life, especially among the urban Tatar population: workers, artisans and the petty bourgeoisie. Workers' wives and housewives have long ceased to play that pitiful, humiliated role of a wordless slave, which was previously predetermined from birth to every Tatar woman. They strive for personal life, for independent earnings. In the industry of Soviet Tatarstan at the beginning of 1924, there were 3.873 women employed in production, in the next 1925 this number decreased due to the liquidation of the garment industry to 2.837, but already in 1926 it rose again to 3.375, making 2O, 29 ° / about all industrial workers of the republic. The influx of women into production is great, so much so that the size of the local industry can no longer satisfy it; hence the increasing unemployment. In 1927, 7,964 unemployed women were registered, of which 802 were Tatar women. Tatar women workers are mainly concentrated in production, while Russian women, in addition, make up a rather significant percentage of Soviet employees. The total number of women trade union members in 1926 was 26,858, that is, 26.08о / о of all members of trade unions, of which 3.551 were Tatar women. This process of drawing women into the city, into production and into the trade union results in a radical transformation of the historically formed type of Tatar woman, changing its entire psychology, created by the old way of life. Until recently, a woman who is dark and barely literate is now beginning to strive for education. In the universities opened by the Soviet government of Tatarstan, workers' schools, technical schools, courses, schools of FZU and vocational schools, the number of Tatar women is already very significant. In Soviet educational institutions, the Tatar worker learns to read and write both in Russian and in her own language, which is no longer persecuted, but on the contrary enjoys official recognition. The matter of political education of Tatar workers is also going well. In addition to a number of general newspapers and magazines in Tatar and Russian, the women's department of the Tatobkom of the CPSU (b; together with the department of workers and peasants of the Central Committee of the CPSU (b; publishes a special women's magazine Azad Katyn ( Svobodnaya Rabotnitsa.) The growth of the political consciousness of the Tatar female masses is especially striking if we take one, the most indicative area of ​​the republic's social life - the participation of women in the soviets. In the first years, the involvement of Tatar women in political life was rather slow. For the most part, Tatar peasant women were not at all used the electoral rights granted to them by the revolution. This was explained by a strong tradition at that time: husbands, fathers, brothers looked at it disapprovingly, and sometimes resorted to active influence, using the last remnants of their once formidable influence. the city among the much more conscious Tatar workers, oddly enough, there was such shameful and ignorant attitude towards a woman, her personality, her rights. Even in the election campaign of 1924/25. h women participated in council elections in the amount of 12.7% of the total number of all voters while men came to the polls 63.3%. Until that year, women in some localities did not appear at all for elections. The party began an energetic struggle against this phenomenon. Instead of the previous formal approach to elections, when individual female candidates were mechanically included in the lists, a large campaign was launched, during which the working people of the city and village were explained all the absurdity and reactionaryness of this contempt for women, inherited from the previous exploitative system. In addition, a new electoral method was used for the first time in the 1925/26 election campaign. Election meetings were organized for women separately from men; in this way, great activity and ease of the electorate, freed from male influence, was achieved. The results of this event showed up very quickly. The number of women voters in this campaign increased to 35.4% of the total number of voters. In the same year, 3,282 women were elected to village councils throughout the republic, of which 57%, i.e. 1,818 people were Tatar, whereas in the previous 1924/25 the number of women in village councils was only 1,016 (of whom 538 were Tatars), and in 1923/24 only 324 (of whom 117 were Tatars; As a result of the 1925/26 election campaign, 9 women (7.7 ° / 0) were elected to Tattsik, of whom 5 were Tartars. In this campaign, women representatives were actively involved in all election commissions; finally, after the elections, It is necessary to especially note the remarkable fact that in these elections it was Tatar women who showed the greatest activity, outstripping both Russians and national women.For example, Russian peasant women often did not attend election meetings or left before the elections, citing the fact that they were in a hurry there were almost no such cases among Tatar women.In some areas, for example, in the Laishevsky canton, the activity of women's electoral gatherings significantly exceeded the activity of men's. there are cases when men tried to put pressure on women-voters and impose certain candidates on them, but women's assemblies came out of this test with honor, firmly defending an independent line. When discussing any one candidate, 9-10 women-speakers came forward, and in their speeches they were mostly sincere, objective and persistent. Sometimes men continued to hinder the work of women's meetings, not recognizing the legitimacy of their chosen candidates and demanding their re-election through a men's meeting, but such attempts still ended in failure thanks to the resilience of the women. The role of women in Soviet Tatarstan in the field of justice is also very noticeable. In addition to the numerous women elected as people's judges in the TSSR, there are women judges, investigators, notaries and one woman prosecutor. Participation of women in cooperation is quite important for the emancipation of a Tatar woman. And in the Kazan Central Regional Committee and in rural cooperatives, the number of working Tatar women is increasing every year. Here the Tatar peasant woman joins social life, gets imbued with the collective consciousness and contributes to the cause of socialist construction.All these facts are extremely important and interesting, as a living illustration of the tremendous successes achieved by the government and the party in the field of restructuring of everyday life. 2. Pioneers and Octobrists! in the Tatar school. A lot has been done in the field of eliminating those terrible antihygienic conditions, from which in the past such a mass of Tatar women and children died, especially in the villages, in the field of protection of motherhood and infancy. Currently, Kazan has 1G crèches, 6 children's consultations, 6 consultations for pregnant women, maternity and infant care home, 21 kindergartens, 6 playgrounds and 3 child homes; in the cantons, there are up to 120 nurseries, 22 consultations, a maternity and infant care home, 22 kindergartens, '54 playgrounds and 8 orphanages. Of course, with all this work done, there are some shortcomings; so, for example, there is an acute shortage of workers who speak the Tatar language, which is so necessary for medical posts, judicial institutions, etc. in the village; there are still some shortcomings, but in general, the results of the work done in these recent years are very significant. Before our eyes, a Tatar woman, who was so recently a slave, a livestock, a thing, now comes to life - becomes independent, enters the arena of public and political activity. The centuries-old way of stupid religious suppression, the tyranny of the husband, the tyranny of the mullahs, is gradually becoming obsolete and will soon be forgotten by the Tatar as a bad dream. Ladies and young ladies from Tatar bourgeois families sought reforms within the limits outlined by the Sharia, but the female masses of Tatarstan rejected this program along with the former patriarchal way of life and the rule of religious prejudices. Modern female youth is already free from the power of the difficult past and the tradition it has created; percentage of girls the Komsomol is growing, and the cadres of young pioneers are expanding. The Tatar Komsomol organization seeks to involve in its work an ever wider cadre of working youth, in particular Tatar; in 1927 the Tatars made up 42.1 o / o in the Komsomol against 39.8 o / o in the previous year. The Komsomol organization conducts vigorous cult work, fights against the remnants of the old Muslim way of life, mainly in relation to women, develops physical education among the working youth, etc. The Pioneer organization of the TSSR, numbering about 15,000 people. still somewhat weak; the lack of teaching staff is very disadvantageous in her work. Nevertheless, the drawing of Tatar children into the ranks of the pioneers is proceeding at a rather rapid pace. The Tatar girl, who is growing up and studying in the Soviet school, will finally put an end to those remnants of the recent shameful slavery, which are still preserved here and there in the bear corners of Tatarstan.
