1. General outline of the Oirat Autonomous Region
Oirat Autonomous Region, part of the RSFSR, is located in Altai, in Western Siberia. Its neighbors are: from the south - the Kyrgyz Republic, from the east - Mongolia. In the north and west, the borders are the Siberian provinces. Altai, a vast mountainous country, with a total length of approximately 90,000 square meters. kilometers, it is like a frozen giant lake, on which mighty stone waves rose in all directions. These are the Kholzun and Sailyugem ridges with countless spurs, here called squirrels (the main ones: Katun squirrels with the Belukha summit, Yuzhno-Chuiski squirrels, Terekta squirrels, etc.); The largest peaks, rising to a height of 10-15,000 feet, that is, above the line of eternal snows, feed a number of glaciers and give rise to many rivers, of which the main — the Katun and the Biya — make up, at the confluence, one of the largest rivers in Siberia — the Ob. The whole country has a typically mountainous character: peaks and ridges are interspersed with valleys or mountain steppes, abound in fast rivers, lakes (the largest is Lake Taurus), sometimes giving majestic pictures and, according to many travelers, in its beauty is in no way inferior to the famous Alps ... The slopes of the ridges are overgrown with forests, consisting almost exclusively of larch, arching its gigantic branches from the bottom up. Under the protection of trees, the grass rises in a powerful green carpet, sometimes reaching the height of a person. The forests are inhabited by animals typical of the Siberian taiga, from bears to deer and squirrels. The region is very rich in minerals (gold, jasper, coal, iron and silver-lead ore). Altai is one of the localities where traces of primitive mankind have been preserved. There are remains of ancient mining and smelting works here. Through the Altai Dodans, which lay on the routes from Asia to Europe, waves of tribes poured, leaving behind many burial mounds. In antiquity, Altai was inhabited by some kind of blond race, probably related to the Finns and ousted by the Turkic tribes in the 6th century. The Mongol conquests of the 13th century, in which the Turks took an active part, finally secured the land for the Turkic peoples who formed an independent state in Western Siberia, after the weakening and fall of the Mongols. The latter fell only under the blows of the Russian colonial conquest, which began in the 16th century and continuously covered more and more areas in Siberia. The conquest of Altai proper began, however, only at the beginning of the 18th century and was dictated by the interests of predatory industrialists who discovered copper ore here. From that time on, the region attracted "special attention" to tsarist Russia and began to quickly colonize, mainly with the help of exiles. For the local population, truly terrible times have come. Not to mention the "legal" robbery and arbitrariness practiced by officials and military detachments, the merciless exploitation of the local population began with the help of proven means of commercial predation (buying up valuable goods for penny trinkets, a system of usury unrestrained by any limits, soldering, etc.) . P.). The uprisings with which the Altai responded to the oppression 'led to the fact that they ceased to have any "rights". Russian immigrants, according to one of the eyewitnesses, “settle on their lands, climb into auls with weapons in their hands, burn yurts, and steal herds. And the savage doesn't even know who to turn to for help. The authorities rarely visit these regions, and if they do, they catch up with unaccountable horror on the Altai; as soon as he hears the sound of a bell and in a moment, abandoning his horse on the way, runs to hide in the forest until the postal troika passes its places. ”As a result of this disgusting policy, which doomed the local population to poverty and extinction and sought to oust and replace it Russian settlers, the picture of the national composition of the region changed dramatically. At present, the Voyrat Autonomous Republic has about 90,000 people, of which the Oirats account for only .41.6 o / o, Russians 54.9%, Kirghiz 2.6 and the remaining 0.9%. The self-name of the Oirats is somewhat descriptive, since this group includes the Altai, Telengits, Teleuts, etc. However, the long-term cohabitation, or rather the common bondage of tsarist Russia, was created from all these tribes such a homogeneous whole that the above division gets an artificial character. In general, the Oirats can be considered tribes of the Turkic race, despite the fact that the name itself is of Mongolian origin (Oirats are Western Mongols). ' 'Let us now turn to the current economic state of the region. Let's make a reservation from the very beginning: the figures below characterize the economy of the region as a whole. And given the sharp division in the economic way of life that exists between the Russian, predominantly sedentary agricultural, and the native, almost exclusively cattle-breeding-nomadic population, these figures, of course, cannot be distributed simply in proportion to their number. Overwhelming mass new products fall on the first. -On the other hand, the data on the number of livestock should be changed in the direction of slightly increasing the actual figures for the second. Unfortunately, we do not have accurate information on the distribution of all agricultural products and implements between national groups. So, with a total sown area of ​​20.3 thousand dessiatines, the total harvest of grain crops (rye, wheat, barley, oats, buckwheat, millet ) is expressed in an amount of approximately 1.250.000 poods, or about 13 poods per capita. Livestock (in thousands of heads) is considered: horses — 75, cattle — 110, small — 200, pigs — 17, or for every 100 households: horses — 425, cattle — 625, small — 1,100, pigs — 100. In order to somewhat revive these figures for the Oirat population, let us try to sketch out a diagram of the household structure of an ordinary Oirat. The main and most common Oirat dwelling among the poor is the conical yurtal hut made of poles covered with bark. There are windows in this building, called "alanchik". no, but a wooden shield serves as a door. A hole is cut at the top for smoke outlet. In winter, "alanchik" is covered with manure or snow, since otherwise the temperature in it, even if a continuous fire is maintained, is unbearable. Some step forward in comparison; with "alanchik" is "kerego" —the same hut with lattice wooden walls covered with thick felt. Although felt is better than bark, it protects from coloia -! And in "kerego" in winter, sleep without undressing. This type of buildings, borrowed from the Kirghiz or the Mongols, is common among the more prosperous; a wooden shield replaces skin or leather as a door. There is also a third type of buildings, however, which has spread only very recently: this is already a kind of hut — a wooden blockhouse, about human height, covered from above with a conical roof made of poles or bark. The hearth in all dwellings is of the most primitive structure and usually consists of a clay slab, on which a fire is made. In the absence of windows, the yurt is illuminated either by a wide-open door, or by the light of the hearth. The interior decoration fully corresponds to this simplicity of construction. All furniture consists of pack bags, standing right on the ground along the walls and replacing our wardrobes and chests of drawers. The richer the owner, the more sum he has. A bed is built into the sums, sometimes with a piece of cloth for the well-to-do. On the floor in front of the hearth hide. The walls are also hung with skins, guns, various hunting tools, food supplies, etc. On the wall opposite the entrance there are fetishes, and in front of them is a rope with rags in honor of deceased ancestors, who, according to religious beliefs, protect the contentment of families. The yurt is divided into two parts: to the left of the entrance — male, to the right—; women and children. In such a dwelling, the Oirat spends all the time free from activities, the main of which are cattle breeding and hunting. The smoke from the hearth spreads all over the yurt, spirals the breath, blinds the eyes, and settles in thick soot on the walls. Dirt takes on staggering dimensions: Oirat does not know | completely using soap and towels and only occasionally pours water on his hands and face, then drying them in front of the fire. Piles of manure accumulate near the yurt. In this almost absolutely antihygienic atmosphere, all kinds of parasites are incredibly developing: they even force the usual Altaian to leave their home and move to a new one. And it should be noted that this does not happen rarely. And if we add to this all kinds of diseases, and especially epidemics, which, of course, find extremely favorable conditions for spreading, the picture becomes even more bleak. Among the diseases spreading in a wide wave around the edge, it is necessary to highlight syphilis, brought here by Russian settlers, which plays an important role in the physical weakening and even extinction of the indigenous population. The clothes of the Oirats-men, which, among other things, they like to paint with bright colors (red boots, yellow hat, etc.), consists of a long shirt; and short, tied at the knees, trousers. In cold weather, a woolen robe with wide sleeves ("chokpen") is worn on top, and in winter a short fur coat ("yachi") made of wild goat skins, sometimes with wool outside, and the same boots. On the head they wear round colored leather (yellow with a red bottom) hats, trimmed with a lamb band, or fur hats. Teenage girls, and sometimes women, wear horse skins over shirts and pants. Typical for Altai women's clothing is "chegedekh" - a special sleeveless cape in blue. It is worn, however, only married. The headdress is the same as that of men — a round red-yellow hat with a lamb band. Children usually go completely naked. The food is mainly dairy and meat, like all nomadic pastoralists. Favorite national food "tergom", lamb intestines stuffed with blood and cereals. Favorite drink - kumis, the stock of which is almost always kept in each yurt in a special bag called "arkyt". The vast majority of Oirats are cattle.dy. Agriculture is spreading extremely slowly, and only a comparatively insignificant part is engaged in it, using the most primitive tools (hand plow) and leading agriculture in the most backward forms. This is to a large extent explained, undoubtedly, by the seizure of the best lands by the Russian settlers and the displacement of the native population into territories that are inconvenient for agriculture. Be that as it may, the process of transition of the Oirats to a settled way of life, although slowly, is taking place; so now it is no longer possible to speak of a purely nomadic way of life. In a number of cases, life becomes semi-sedentary or even sedentary, and if many Oirats move from place to place, then mainly in the form of a change of winter quarters and summer camps, already firmly attached to one or another camp. In addition to supervising herds, which takes up relatively little time, the Oirat is engaged in hunting, fishing, beekeeping and collecting various kinds of hazelnuts and grass roots, which are often used for food. The Oirat spends all his free time at home, sitting by the hearth and smoking tobacco from a long pipe (a pipe and a tobacco pouch tucked into the belt are an indispensable accessory for the clothes of every Oirat, even women), accepting neighbors, or, conversely, he goes to guests to a neighbor. And if some kind of celebration takes place in a circle with a radius of up to 50 versts — a wedding, a funeral, a sacrifice — the entire male population gathers there to eat meat, drink araka (local moonshine; vodka made from milk) and kumis and see friends. Only women and children then remain in the deserted district ails (Oirat division). According to their religious beliefs, the Oirats are shamanists. The whole world, according to these beliefs, is inhabited by a number of good and evil spirits, respectively led by Ulgen (a good deity who created the earth and laid it on three whales in the sea), and Erlik (an evil deity, the source of all evil for man). Considering himself surrounded by all kinds of hostile spirits, the oirat brings them a propitious sacrifice for every step associated with difficulties. This sacrifice once consisted of a ram. With the passage of time, the Oirat learned to deceive the spirits, stuffing the lamb skin with stones, and leaving the meat for himself. Recently, the share of the spirits, probably due to the impoverishment of the population, only got stones. A number of difficult crossings through mountain streams or dangerous trees are marked by heaps of stones, piled up by the oi-rat who safely avoided danger. Unfortunately, not all spirits are ready to be satisfied with such a gift, and especially those with whom the “kams” (Oirat shamans) deal. And since in the conditions of the Oirat reality, the kams are almost the only "doctors" (the disease, according to the beliefs of the Oirats, is caused by the invasion of a person by evil spirits, with which only the kam can fight), it is clear that they are not satisfied with the "stone" fee : Christianity, zealously spread by Orthodox missionaries among the Oirats, did not receive success. If they had a certain number of baptized, then their Christianity was purely formal, but in essence they remained the same shamanists as their unbaptized brethren. Unless the composition of the spirits was replenished by Orthodox saints, but the priest began to play the role of a kama with peculiar methods of magic (church service, sacraments, etc.). However, even such a purely outward acceptance of Orthodoxy was not widely spread among the Oirats, although the missionaries resorted to increase the number of "converts" to such, for example, methods as the prohibition to pray to the "pagan gods" at a distance of 5 versts from the village, in which one Orthodox native was born. A feature of the social community of the Oirats is, the tribal life, of course, has already undergone significant changes. The main economic base of the clan system is “Communal cattle breeding with common clan ownership of herds no longer exists. The family is the economic unit of the economy. However, the family life * has been preserved in a number of customs and vestiges. In a sense, it can be argued that the modern social-class division of the population is largely due to the clan structure. The fact is that the tsarist administration, in its desire to reduce the administrative overheads for collecting "yasak," the colonial tribute that it levied on the native population, resorted to the services of zaisans, tribal elders. Naturally, the latter, combining in their person the administrative, judicial and economic management of the clan, were able to seize a significant part of the economic wealth of the region during the collapse of the clan economy, not to mention the fact that they were enriched for a number of years due to the appropriation of part of the "yasak" collected by them for the Russian administration. Besides the management that has kept! its tribal organization, survivals of the tribal system can be undoubtedly established in a number of customs, mainly concerning the position of women. However, we will talk about this ““ in detail below. Now we will only note 'that. The generic life had a very a great influence on the servile, almost enslaving state in which the Oirats find a woman. The description of the life of the native Oirat population that we have given refers mainly to the Altaians. The rest of the Oirat peoples - Telengits, Teles, Teleuts, etc., differ from them in their way of life, customs and beliefs only in insignificant local details. Such are, for example, the peculiarities of wedding ceremonies, accompanied by special slander among the Telengits, or some peculiar forms of clothing among the Teleuts. In addition, different groups of the population differ from each other in their economic status. So, the Teleuts already mentioned by us, living in the vicinity of the main center of the Oirat region, Ulaly, have switched to a sedentary lifestyle and are engaged in agriculture. In this regard, Russian influence becomes especially noticeable on them, affecting the way of life, and in the forms of buildings, and in the cut of clothing, which are already losing their national characteristics. But if we exclude these inevitable differences, the diagram of the everyday life of an Altaian sketched above is typical for the entire region.

2. Pre-revolutionary oirat
Double oppression — the Russian colonial-economic enslavement of the region and the remnants of the tribal system in family life — rests on the shoulders of the pre-revolutionary oirat. She is a slave in the full sense of it! the words. Echoes of that ancient form of family life, when a woman was the same common property of the family, like a herd of horses or a herd of rams, to the last! time preserved in a number of customs, consolidating its slave servitude position. On the other hand, the atmosphere of economic ruin of the Oirat population, which came with the Russian colonization, to an extraordinary degree worsened this situation, reducing the Oirat to the role of a cruelly exploited worker, due to whose labor not only the family lived, but also the predators of the Russian, commercial and bureaucratic world The following facts are characteristic for the clarification of the position of the oiratka in the past, in connection with the remnants of the tribal life. Among the Oirats, children cannot call their father by name, just as the words "son" or "daughter" are not used in their language, being replaced by the words "child" or "girl". The historical explanation for this lies in the fact of the woman's former belonging to the whole family, when the mother, naturally, could not know the father of her child, and when the very concept of paternity did not take place. A number of survivals from the family life of the Oirots confirm the correctness of this conclusion. Altaians have no right to enter a married woman. the dwelling of the father-in-law is farther than the threshold, to bare his head, arms or legs in his presence, to transfer something to him from hand to hand and generally enter into any kind of intercourse with him, even if they are limited to a simple joke. For Teleuts, women's clothing has a high collar and narrow casing at the sleeves specially for this purpose (not to open the head, chest and arms in the presence of the husband's older relatives), and the headdress is never removed. All these 'rules were introduced, undoubtedly, during the transition from family marriage to personal marriage, and had as their task to protect a man from encroachment on his wife by other members of the family, especially his older relatives. Thus, we see that in ancient times human rights were not recognized at all for the Oirat woman. She was the property of the clan, a common slave and a common concubine, which the clan probably bought or kidnapped from its neighbors. This method of buying and selling a wife has been preserved until recently. Under the strict exogamous system of marriage (the wife is taken necessarily from a foreign clan), the wife is acquired for money (kalym), and she breaks off all ties with relatives and cannot return to them of her own free will. The husband, of course, is a complete master and can, if he wishes, send her back, but she herself is his property 'and has no right to do so. In the event of a husband's death, she remains in his family, as part of the inheritance, and often even passes over as a wife! to his brother or other close relative. She can return to her previous clan, to her family, only if the kalym is returned back, that is, it was redeemed or resold back. This fact alone is characteristic enough to clarify the position that the Oirat occupies in the family and society. Indeed, is it possible to speak of any economic rights of an oirat, if it is not a subject (carrier), but an object (subject) of ownership? Indeed, we see in the pre-revolutionary Oirat everyday life a complete disregard for women in the sense of giving her at least the most elementary economic independence. The unconditional owner of all family property, including the one brought by the wife as a dowry, is the husband. She is extremely limited in inheritance rights, even when she is not yet married, after the death of her father. In this case, all rights, including the right to sell it for kalym, pass to the son, brother or other male relative of the father. It should be noted that the sale of an oirats as a wife by the Oirats themselves is viewed almost exclusively as an economic transaction. At least the fact that customary law gives a man the opportunity to take a wife before puberty (8-9 years old) proves that one of the main points in marriage is not so much the acquisition of a wife as the acquisition of a female worker. Below we will try to give a general picture of the life of the Oirat and her role in the working life of the family, from which the value of such an acquisition for the Oirat will become clear and this desire is understandable. Now let us note that the oiratka, of course, did not have any participation in public life or a voice in public administration. In the same way, she was completely devoid of education, even the most elementary. If the general percentage of literacy of the Oirat population gives a figure of 6% (with 20% of Russian literacy), then for the Oirat, the youth drops sharply, giving only a few representatives. What did the Russian "kulturtragerstvo", which the tsarist Russia, imitating the ideologists of the colonial policy of the Western European imperialist powers, loved to justify its predatory conquests Nothing! Or rather, even more than nothing. It aggravated the already difficult situation of the oiratka. We are not even talking about the fact that the first conquerors of Siberia, on the basis of wartime rights, adopted the custom of abducting women from the natives, conducting it only on a massive scale and organizing entire expeditions that literally left entire villages or even regions without a female population. They “needed” women, and they got them, however, at the expense of the natives. According to Belyavsky, "many foreigners died single, since all foreign women were taken away by the Russians." And yet the main evil was not this, but that the ruin of the Oirat economy, which came with the "yasak" collected by the greedy administration, and a kind of "trade" practiced by the predatory merchant, and the general impoverishment of the entire Oirat population hit hardest of all a woman. If before the relative prosperity brightened her life at least a little, now there is no trace of it. From the economic ruin it was the woman who suffered in the first place. Not to mention the fact that, thus, she was deprived of the opportunity to slightly embellish the home environment, dress or eat better - a significant part of the work was shifted onto her shoulders, on the appropriation of the results of which the Russian merchants and kulaks surrounding the Oirat built their predatory well-being ... Pumping out all kinds of commodity values ​​from the Oirat economy, from livestock to hunting products, they deprived the yuyratku, nair., Milk, which went for watering the young, bought from a native and left to grow from the owner (one of the methods of making money often used in Altai , consisting in the fact that instead of a calf bought for 1 ruble, a merchant or a kulak, in 2-3 years received a whole bull worth 30-50 rubles), furs used by the oirat to decorate a yurt or make clothes, etc. , the sharp decline in economic well-being that came with the Russians, naturally, caused a corresponding pressure from the dominant male part of the population, expressed mainly in c. the rise of demands for women’s labor and the deprivation of women of the most basic material comforts, the oirat gave birth to a child. If it is a son, the father carves out a small bow and arrows, if it is a daughter, he simply cuts off the top of a young birch tree to nail it over the cradle of a newborn '. This actually limits his worries about the new 'family member. Of course, the birth of a son seems to be a more significant phenomenon than the birth of a daughter, being explained by the dominant role played by a man in Oirat society. However, the birth of a daughter does not cause acute disappointment. First, it will grow into a valuable worker. And secondly, and this is of no small importance, when she grows up she can be sold, that is, to marry and get kalym-; as a board. Be that as it may, the child finds his place in the family, and gets his use of a cradle made of bark and filled with rags. From above, he is covered with some kind of blanket or skins and begins to live. All worries about caring for him, lying down, of course, entirely; on the mother, are limited to what is absolutely necessary: ​​at certain intervals he receives mother's milk. Feeding the baby is extremely uneven, p minutes, which the mother can snatch from her almost continuous work. The rest of the time he can scream as much as he wants — adults do not pay any attention to him. And if you remember that the yurt contains whole hordes of parasites, that the smoke from the hearth eats the eyes, and the ice jet creeps to the cradle with everyone entering or leaving the room, then it should be noted that the child has more than legal grounds for screaming. Enough. Above we have already noted the appallingly unhygienic pirate yurt. In relation to the child, she receives, so to speak, harmonious completeness. The baby is washed only once, at birth. This first washing is, in fact, limited to his acquaintance) with water. In the future, it is only occasionally smeared with fat, which replaces the washing of the Oirats. Often, calves, lambs and puppies are brought up in the yurt at the same time as the child. All departures are made by them, of course, right there, so that the atmosphere in which the child spends his first months is saturated with suffocating fumes. Without knowing at all the linen or washing those rags with which he is wrapped, the child is doomed to grow and develop in such an environment that only a very viable organism can withstand. Infant mortality, naturally, is enormous, and it is this that is one of the main reasons for the gradual extinction of the Oirats. Potential epidemics are given ample room for development here. In addition, syphilis brought in by the Russians clearly demonstrates its destructive effect on a number of children affected by rickets: thin, long arms, a large head, a swollen belly and crooked legs are very common among Altai children. As the child grows, his life or, rather, the surrounding the situation is changing are very insignificant. The child is very early weaned from the mother's breast and transferred first to cow or horse milk, and then to the usual food of adults with the inevitable "pusher" (toasted barley flour) and "tuptash", which is made from pieces of dough dipped in boiling water or milk. From early childhood, the Oirat girl begins to show her subordinate position, her female powerlessness. This is primarily expressed in the relationship between brothers and sisters. Growing up, the boy learns and gets used to the contemptuous treatment of the girl, learning to value his "manhood" above all else. There is no greater offense for him than cleaning the yurt, taking care of children or other "female" work. He early gets involved in men's conversations and men's interests, goes to graze livestock or go hunting, drawing pride in these pursuits, contemptuously assessing the work of his sister, offending and insulting her. This difference between a boy and a girl is evident, for example, when a guest visits a yurt. While the boy turns around the guest next to his father, talking, smoking or drinking, with him, a teenage girl fumbles somewhere in the female quarters, flushing mutton intestines or helping her mother prepare a treat; guests are not for her, just as not for women at all. As soon as and as far as her childish strengths allow, the girl is immediately attracted to work in the family, which, as we have already noted, lies entirely with her mother. And the mother, of course, shifts part of this work to the growing daughters. Milking cows and horses, carried out already in the early morning, carrying firewood or brushwood for the hearth, preparing dinner, as well as koumiss and araki, making clothes, supervising children - this is the circle of work into which the girl is gradually drawn, and at the same time in size , very few corresponding to her physical strength. There is very little free time that the boys spend in games. Very early, the girl gets used to decorating herself, decorating her clothes with colorful patches or skins, weaving bugles, beads or even rattles and bells into her hair. Braids, in general, are the subject of the most attentive care of the oirat. The larger the braids and the longer they are, the more it is valued by the Oirats (male Oirats also 'wear a braid). A short braid is considered a shame, and often women weave other people's hair into the braid just to make it longer and thicker. Married women wear two braids, girls wear three, five or seven (always an odd number). When an oirat greets a guest or treats him, she touches her scythe. This replaces her with our handshake or bow. No matter how hard it is for the girl in her own family, the future threatens her with an even more difficult fate. As soon as she grows up, often at a very early age (9-12 years), she gets married, that is, is simply sold by a father or another head of the family, in case of his death, to some Oirat necessarily from a different clan. Until very recently, the sale of girls, even in infancy, was widely practiced, so that it was sold not only in marriage, but also simply as a worker, and the price sometimes dropped to a ruble and below. To a very wide extent, this technique was practiced by Russian merchants and kulaks, who introduced into Oirat use another peculiar way of buying slaves under the guise of recipients (as a spiritual father). Selling in marriage, on the condition of buying a wife for a kalym (ransom), is so typical of the Oirats that it is almost impossible to talk about another form of marriage with them. Rarely, rarely does a “runaway” marriage take place, when an oirat decides to run away from her family because of her strong feelings for some poor man who is unable to pay for her kalym. The wedding itself is accompanied by various kinds of rituals, which strongly reflect the remnants of the clan system and emphasize the woman's servitude, and an inevitable feast. In some places, a special hut is built for the young, from the branches of birch trees, during which they spend three days hopelessly in it. When getting married, an Oirat has to completely break with the usual situation, break away from the south of her family and ail, and this gap is very sharp. She becomes the complete property of her husband. In an alien, most often hostile environment, she can achieve at least only a tolerant attitude towards herself on one condition — complete and unrequited obedience. And the latter, of course, entails the same unrequited performance of work, which she is very generously given in a new family. Not to mention her husband, who doesn’t strike a finger in order to help her in her work, on her, a helpless alien, the mother-in-law and sister-in-law shift the whole burden of domestic suffering, taking the opportunity to ease themselves a little from overwork. As we have already noted above, the position of women among the Oirats is largely due to the fact that she was previously a clan property, a common slave and a common concubine. Therefore, in the transition from generic to personal marriage, a number of shy ones were imposed on the woman. prohibitions to ensure the husband from attempts on his wife by men of his kind. In addition to the prohibition to talk with other men, the lack of access to the male half, especially when there are guests, these prohibitions are very painful for the oirat when they touch her clothes. We have already noted the custom of tying the neck and sleeves with narrow, dense sheathing and constantly wearing a cap on the head of teleut women greatly restricts movement and does not allow free movement even in summer. But apart from these restrictions, the intercourse of the oiratka with outsiders is limited in the most strict way. As a hostess, it is true, she must greet the guest and even bring him to him, holding the braids with her hand, that is, with a bow, -araku, ku-m! s or tea. But with this silent reception of the guest And, in fact, her contact with him ends. In the future, the owner himself treats the guest, talks to him, and the wife has only the extra trouble in making the dishes, which she does in the female half. In the same way, an oiratka rarely goes to visit herself. For this she does not have the most important thing - free time. Whether therefore, somewhere nearby, some feast on the occasion of a birth, wedding, funeral or sacrifice happens — one husband goes to visit. Communication with companions in the ail takes place only in fits and starts: while collecting brushwood, he will exchange family news in passing with a neighbor who is engaged in the same business as she, or will specially go to visit her - these are the primitive and random forms of a woman's participation in public life, which she is provided with the Oirat way of life. Even in religious life she takes the most limited part. First of all, the main religious rite of the Oirats is the solemn sacrifice. takes place, Usually, in some nearby valley, where the kam goes, accompanied by some husbands. The only time a woman is given some role in public ceremonies is at a funeral. Women have the duty to mourn the deceased, which they do, filling the yurt in which the dead is located with crying, lamentations and howling. Thus, the oirat is doomed to live within the interests of the family: the yurt, husband, children and cattle - this is the circle in which she was doomed to spin to the grave, without any hope of an outcome, of improving her situation. And inside this circle is slavery, humiliation and oppression. The husband is the head and the lord, to whom she must conform, all the desires of which she must fulfill, and, of course, there can be no question of any protest or attempts to influence him. It’s also good if the husband is by nature — and it should be noted that most of the Oirats, according to researchers, are distinguished by their peacefulness and gentleness — he does not tyrannize his wife. If, to her misfortune, he is distinguished by cruelty, her position becomes truly hopeless. Life and custom do not then provide her with any ways to oppose anything to male arbitrariness, even in the case of direct physical torture. She can return back to her family only on condition of the return of the kalym, which is only done by exceptional families and in exceptional cases. The right to separate from his wife is given exclusively to the man, who can simply send her back. In a word, pre-revolutionary legality did not give the Oirat any weapon against male arbitrariness and made her completely defenseless in this respect. Extramarital affairs are very common among the Oirats. According to one researcher, "the freedom of sexual relations between Altai sometimes reaches the point that in places of their crowded camps, relations between women and men are sometimes so intertwined that it is impossible to tell who is with whom (is in, legal or illegal relationship." and public opinion does not put any prohibitions on the man in this regard, even the behavior of a woman in these cases is turned a blind eye. Marriage relations also take place before marriage and are not a decisive obstacle to getting married, although, of course, they lower the value of kalym. in view of early marriage, they do not receive such wide distribution as extramarital affairs. The above household scheme of life of the clan Oirat is typical for the vast majority of the Oirat population, although, of course, there are a number of shades in some individual (cases. In addition to local differences explained by tribal peculiarities (see above about telesh birds, teleuts, etc.), which are essentially insignificant, following t note the differences in the life of the oirat, depending on one degree or another, the economic well-being of her husband. In the general outline, we have already noted the presence of a rather strong stratification of the Oirat population. Along with the bulk of the poor peasants' farms, to a great extent ruined by the predatory erection of Russian merchants and kulaks, there are also more powerful economic units formed as a result of the seizure of the "lion" part of the clan property during the disintegration of the clan economy by the clan elders Russian administrative apparatus! for the economic expropriation of places population. The position of the Oirat, who got married or, more precisely, bought by one of the representatives of this Byrat kulak, naturally changes for the better, while, above all, this improvement concerns living conditions, food conditions and the amount of clothing. It should be noted, however, that the characteristic dirt remains an invariable part of housing, clothing and food even among the richest oiratyuvs. The husband's economic well-being also affects the reduction in the amount of work that goes to the oiratka's share. She gets the opportunity to transfer most of them to the captivity of laborers or laborers. On the other hand, the position of the wife of a poor man who is forced to work with her own or Russian kulak is deteriorating accordingly. She already endures the double oppression of the owner and husband, sometimes taking out the bitterness of her own existence on her humility and irresponsibility. We are no longer talking about her living conditions, about her food or clothing — these conditions are such that one can confidently assert: “It never gets worse.” There is another series of differences, essential! influencing the life of the oyratka. It is mainly "not getting married. Although it happens relatively rarely, it does happen. And it should be noted that in this case, her position again sharply deteriorates. First of all, the family is trying to "squeeze" the kalym out of it through increased exploitation, which is deprived of it by this absenteeism. In the future, she finds herself in the position of an eternal slave worker, consistently submitting to the successive heads of the house: if the father died, his older brother takes his place. In the inheritance, she does not take any or very ghostly share of participation. It is remarkable that the oiratka does not even have an idea of ​​the possibility of independent economic existence. She just 'does not understand how a woman can live alone, without the help and guidance of a man. In this respect, the Oirat custom and everyday life allow only one exception. This is when a woman becomes a shaman, a kam woman. Since the latter, according to the religious ideas of the Oirats, cannot be made, but can only be chosen “from above,” “spirits,” and refusal to call is punishable by death, then it is not so rare that this “election” falls on; woman. In this, but only in this case; Oiratka can achieve the same value as a man in society. Her influence, as well as the associated economic situation, destroys the usual norms of relations between a man and a woman., In, in some individual cases, a woman-kam who managed to manifest in some special way: her power in communicating with spirits, and its exceptional "strength", even reaches a predominant value, \ gaining a leading role and the highest authority in the public consciousness. However, even here there is one difference between male kamas and female kamas. While the Kama-men devote themselves to both Ulgen (good deity) and Erlik (evil deity), a woman. can become a kam only on condition of dedication to Erlik: good deity! does not accept women as his servant. Small, but what a characteristic detail. Finally, the last series of everyday features that distinguish individual groups of Oirats is one or another degree of Russian influence. Those of these groups, predominantly of the sedentary or semi-sedentary type, which were most sharply affected by their proximity to Russian settlers, in many ways, and especially in the type of dwelling, clothing and food, adopt Russian forms. Correspondingly, the usual norms of everyday life change somewhat, in a number of details acquiring Russian features. To a certain extent, although very insignificantly, the forms of relations between a man and a woman are also changing, and with them the position of the Oirat in the family and society.
3. Soviet power in Oiratia With the beginning of the October Revolution, as soon as the principles of national emancipation of the oppressed peoples of the Union proclaimed by the Soviet power had sunk to the brink, a national movement began in it. But under the unfavorable conditions in which the region was located due to the distance and the complete absence of railway lines connecting Oiratia with the center, it was very difficult to start consistently carrying out national emancipation, especially since the civil war that broke out with the beginning of the revolution completely cut off the region from center. Nevertheless, the very first steps of the Soviet regime caused an extraordinary sublimation of national consciousness, and a national movement began throughout the region, expressed in the organization of Oirat schools and clubs. The wave of the Kolchak counterrevolutionary movement that swept through Altai completely swept away these first national aspirations; the best Oirat representatives were killed or imprisoned, and over the unfortunate land the whip so well known to him and a formidable commanding shout whistled again. The only difference was that in view of the "Bolshevik" sympathies of the population, the measures took on an openly punitive and massive character. Colonel Khmelevsky, appointed by Kolchak as the commander-in-chief of all troops in Altai, set out to destroy all traces of the revolution here. A nightmare wave of massacres, violence and torture spread throughout the entire region. By orders of Khmelevsky, the leaders of the White-bandit detachments (Kaigorov, Lebedev, Zaitsev, Shustov, etc.) exterminated entire villages, then putting them on fire. The "infection of Bolshevism", however, stayed in the region, feeding the partisan movement that broke out in the rear at Kolchak. As a result of the civil war, the region was subjected to terrible economic ruin, for the Kolchak intendants drove away cattle in large numbers. We are not talking about the robberies, which took on a mass character. The misfortunes that befell the region ended only with the occupation of Siberia by the Red Army, in early 1920. However, when organizing and reorganizing administrative and public administration on the basis of Sovietization of the region, at first, the psychology of the "conquerors", which (the policy of tsarist Russia nurtured among a significant part of the Russian population. The point is that since the role of political leaders of the soviets It turned out, for the most part, local Russian peasant circles, who had not yet outlived the remnants of "conquering" psychology, the line they were pursuing turned out to be harmful to the interests of the Oirat population, without whose active participation in economic construction there could be no question of restoring and developing the economic power of the region. a number of measures to straighten the political line and adapt the apparatus of Soviet power to the specific conditions of the Oirat life and the Oirat economy. ra. Only this date can, therefore, be considered the beginning of that long process which marks the true struggle for national emancipation proclaimed by the October Revolution. Let us emphasize once again: a certain delay in the implementation of the main tasks of reorganizing Oirat life on an October basis is explained by three series of reasons described by us above. These are, first of all, the geographical conditions that move the region away from the center and make it difficult to communicate with the region and inside it (the complete absence of railways and the sad state of other roads is explained by the mountainous nature of the country). Secondly, these are the historical conditions associated with the colonialist policy of tsarist Russia and the remnants of the psychology of "conquerors" among Russian settlers. And finally, thirdly, it is a civil war. In addition, it should be noted that there was no industry in the province, and in this regard, no workers' asset, which was the most revolutionary factor in other areas of the Union. What did this new Soviet power do for the Oirats? First of all, it provided economic positions for the Oirat economy. The redistribution of land use and land management on the basis of the nationalization of land, in many cases [by returning the land plots seized from them, to the Oirat, simultaneously protected them from predatory pushing into the most remote and inconvenient territories. The process of this crowding out can be considered basically liquidated. Secondly — and this [no less important — the Soviet government radically suppressed the system of predatory commodity circulation, which pumped a significant share of the products of the pirate labor economy into the clutches of the commercial and kulak strata of the population, both native and, predominantly, Russian. In any case, the relentless struggle against all kinds of cabal deals, and mainly the developing cooperation and state trade, have already paralyzed the most difficult manifestations of this system for the ordinary Oirat, and outlined a very real turning point in the organization of normal commodity exchange. Already at the moment, one can state an undoubted improvement in the economic situation of the bulk of the Oirat population. In the field of social and political achievements (no less significant. Firstly, national autonomy, opening up the broadest opportunities for national initiative, passes under the sign of all-round support and strengthening of social and the political positions of the Oirat part of the population. The predominant attention to the Oirat population (on medical care, cultural and educational work, reform of housing conditions, agronomic guidance, legal advice, etc.) is already yielding very tangible results. 'True, the need is enormous. There are no funds, no workers, but nevertheless even the most remote aimaks (districts of Oirat region) and khoshuns (volosts) are penetrated by a paramedic, a club, a school, a medical center, a yurt-reading room, etc. the results, such as the appeal of the population itself for medical care and the withdrawal, however, is still very unknown eager, from the medicine practice of kamov or opening, at the initiative of the local population, shelves of mothers and children in a number of cooperatives. Let us make a reservation once again: a number of the facts we have indicated are still only in the nature of undertakings, the successful development of which will require a lot of funds, a lot of workers and a lot of time. Some of them can be realized only if there is a much broader development of the national initiative of the Oirat population than is available. A number of phenomena are of a single character and can be classified only as symptomatic. But these symptoms are indicative and (serve as a sure guarantee that the nascent Oirat Soviet society will overcome all obstacles and provide the region with a broad economic, social and cultural degeneration.

4. The position of the oyratka under Soviet rule
It is clear that no reform of the socio-economic structure of Oirat society is unthinkable without special work aimed at radically restructuring the relationship between a man and a woman, eliminating female powerlessness and female enslavement, which we spoke about in Chapter 2. and speech about any movement forward along the path of national, social, political and economic progress. Let us now see how, against this mixed background — against the background of everyday relations of pre-revolutionary Oiratia and against the background of the social and social reorganization that came with the Soviet regime — work is unfolding among women. First of all, it should be noted that the initial base and at the same time the ultimate goal of this work is full equality of rights between men and women, declared by Soviet legislation. In view of the inconsistency of this requirement with the actual everyday relations, and should seek special work among women. After all, a single decree, no matter how categorically defines any rights or obligations, by itself is not yet able to change human relations, especially where it is opposed by a custom that has been taking shape for hundreds of years. A stubborn and sometimes prolonged struggle for a new way of life is needed, a whole system of measures aimed at the gradual conquest of positions. This does not mean, of course, that in the event of some kind of conflict played out on the basis of the struggle between the old way of life and the new woman, the Soviet government will take some kind of conciliatory middle line, corresponding to the actually existing relations. On the contrary, it then wholly, 100 percent, remains on the side not of actual, but of decreed norms. But if there is no such conflict, then you have to fight for the introduction of a new order, mainly with the help of cultural and educational work, which consolidates, for example, for a woman the consciousness of her new rights and develops women's initiative, on the basis of which only her real is possible. emancipation '.' Let us explain this with an example. At a delegate meeting in one of the villages of Oiratia, the wife of a middle peasant was elected as a delegate. She was about to go — her husband would not let her. Since the desire to go to the meeting overpowered her usual obedience, she. protested and wanted to leave, despite her husband's ban. Then the latter locked her in a barn, and he went to the delegate meeting to listen to what the "women" would talk about. At the meeting at this time, the question of how to care for chickens and increase their egg production was discussed. The husband returned, released his wife and sent her to the meeting. Here is a case that should be carefully considered in the specific situation of Oirat life. Indeed, the very fact of / forcibly keeping the wife's home is, of course, illegal, and if the wife protested it before the appropriate authorities, the law and the authorities would certainly support her in this protest. But the whole point lies in the fact that the oiratka did not even think to protest against such treatment of herself, considering her husband's actions to be completely legal. Imagine now that at a meeting where the husband was, it would be said that a woman has every right to disobey her husband and act always on the basis of an independent opinion. What would the husband do then? Not only would he not have allowed his wife to attend this meeting, but he would have completely forbidden her from attending any meetings. That is why it is necessary to first lay the most general cultural and educational activity at the basis of work among Women, to clarify its consciousness, which is darkened by age-old customs, so that later, on the basis of the growing and developing, thus, activity of the female population itself, lead a more decisive struggle for female emancipation. And it should be noted that in Oiratia this business of cultural and educational work stands in especially difficult conditions, due to female domination, darkness and customs of the past. In fact, if we point out that until now, for example, a significant part of women themselves stand on the basis of the need to preserve kalym, thus considering the custom of buying and selling women to be quite normal, or that women still cannot take root a clear awareness of the economic independence of a woman, that the difficulties of work will become full. Does the above mean that the foundations of Soviet legislation in the part concerning the complete socio-political and economic equalization of women in rights with men do not have any meaning in Oirat reality? Of course not. Since Soviet legality in a number of cases gives the Oiratka a way out, which she did not have at all in pre-revolutionary conditions, the vitality of the new legal order is already affecting individual facts. This is especially true of the laws that establish a woman's right to divorce and receive alimonies and represent for her the only way out of the deadlock into which she was driven by the earlier state orders. The presence of such cases in the Voirat people's courts, although relatively u4 "with an insignificant, almost random percentage, testifies to this. Another feature of work among women in the conditions of Oirat reality is the need to bring to the fore the task of" reorganizing living conditions, in which the oirat lives. Indeed, what kind of cultural upsurge can there be if the yurt (and the entire living environment remains in that appalling condition, which we wrote about in the first chapter of this brochure. and beyond; e for the reorganization of all life in general, including the transition The most cultural ways of managing the economy are, perhaps, the most significant area of ​​the local front of the struggle for women's emancipation. Victory in it cannot be thought of and general success. The better that this work grows together with common work to pull up the backward elements of the entire Oirat society, including the male part.As we saw above, this direction of work among women not only does not revolt Oirats-men against the participation of their women in delegate meetings, but sometimes even challenges - they actively contribute to this work.According to the responses of the responsible leaders of the work among women in Oiratia, I am always present at every delegate meeting In addition to the delegates, there are also men who listen attentively to reports and conversations. The latter is very important, because to ensure a benevolent or even only tolerant attitude towards the work of the wives' apparatus on the part of the male population is a valuable achievement (In the conditions of the Oirat actuality. The fact is that, given the attitude towards women that dominates in everyday relations, and with the downtroddenness and obedience of women that takes place here, active resistance on the part of men could greatly paralyze, and very often, and paralyzes the most successful undertaking. In order to characterize this pernicious influence of everyday psychology, contemptuous of everything "babskoy", we will point out that even in the lower party organizations this psychology takes place. The secretary of the Mydralinskaya village village, the Ust-Kan aimak is asked: "Who is your cell organizer for work among peasant women?" : “I don’t know, it seems, the teacher.” The resolution of the Bureau of the Khakass OK of April 5, 1927 states: - “In the majority of paradise Party committees and cells do not consider work among delegates to be part of Party work; as a result, the leadership of some district committees and cells should be considered insufficient. " If thus, even in some parts of the party apparatus, they simply "forget" about the importance of working among women, then what can we say about the rest of the population, fed by old customs and traditions, accustomed to looking at women as property, and its social dignity. Before proceeding to the description of work among women, let us note another series of difficulties that hinder the development of this work at the required scale and pace. This is extreme worker poverty. It is quite obvious that work requires people who are well acquainted with the life and customs of the Oirats. Only an extremely cautious approach can lead the oirat to realize the full magnitude of the perspective. In many reports on the elimination of illiteracy, we find indications that an insignificant percentage of Oirat women who have passed the lyceum is explained by the fact that Oirat women do not go to a male teacher at all, being ashamed of him. The same fact also takes place in the work on sanitary and medical services for the population: oirat women do not go to a male doctor or a male paramedic. This detail alone emphasizes the difficulties that one has to face when creating a cadre of workers for work among Oirat women. And if we add to this the requirements of knowledge of language and everyday life, extreme poverty by the intellectual forces, moreover, for the most part put forward by the kulak elite of the population, it will be easy to understand that the main condition for the successful conduct of work among women is the need to create an asset of workers from among themselves. oiratok. And indeed, et'a (the task — the task of educating the appropriate cadre — is put forward by the women's department, which organizes here, as elsewhere in our (union, work among women. '' If for 56 women organizers, rural and aimak, there are only 3 oirat women, then we can state that in 1927, 24 women out of a total of 27 people passed the regional courses of the women's department, that several women were sent to obstetric courses, courses for patronage nurses, one Altai woman is in Moscow, at the Communist University of the Working People of the East !, and in the regional 8 Oyrat women are studying in the second year, and 12 students in the first year. The last figures are interesting in the sense that they characterize the relatively increasing rate of involvement of Oirats in studies and the preparation of female activists from the local population. We note in conclusion that the shortage and interruptions in the current work to a large extent have to be attributed to insufficient qualifications, sometimes even just illiteracy, some In spite of all its significance, this work is nevertheless preparatory to the accumulation of reserves and should determine in the future a wider development of tasks that are already being resolved now. The main form of work among women is the so-called delegate meetings. The latter aim to identify the most active part of the female population on the basis of electivity, to gather and organize it around certain points. By acting; the delegates, through conversations, reports and readings according to a certain program, in accordance with local conditions, it is possible to influence in this way the entire mass of the female population. Let us first give figures illustrating the number and growth of delegate meetings in Oiratia in recent years. Delegate meetings (points). ... ... .Number of delegates .................... Including oirats ................. 1925/26% Thus, we can state a certain increase in delegate meetings, and the fact that the participation of Oirat women in them has increased (an increase of over 30% in 1 year) is especially gratifying. This is also indicated by the following circumstance. In November 1925, a delegate meeting was organized for the first time among the nomadic Oirat women. Initially, it included only 6 people, including Fig. 1. Regional congress of women members of the village councils of Oiratek region. 1927, Ulala, number of 3 Russians. But by the end of January 1926, the number of delegates was 27, with the same number of Russians. It took a lot of effort to! overcome the inertia and inertia of the female population itself and paralyze the harmful influence of various prejudices (many oh-rats, for example, were afraid of being elected). But the main work on the initial organization has been done, and the delegate meetings, no matter how they have already taken their place in the Oirat reality. It is also interesting, of course, how the work of the meetings themselves proceeds. Meeting attendance is very high, according to most executives, reaching 70% in winter and 100% in summer. In addition to delegates, non-delegate women also attend delegate meetings, and sometimes the number of the latter even exceeds the number of delegates. Meetings are held frequently. So, for example, during the first half of the month in the Kulada tract, 6 meetings were held; in the Balyk-Tuyul and Kumurtak tracts, meetings also take place weekly. The main topics of delegate meetings are health education, protection of mothers and infancy, agronomic education, coverage of party work and a co-builder. What are the practical results of the work of delegate meetings? First of all, it should be noted that they cover not only delegates. Their influence is much broader. Not to mention the fact that delegates attend meetings, and in quite a significant number non-delegates, all visitors, communicating in everyday life with their relatives and neighbors, spread the information received at the meetings to the entire thickness of the female population. It is not uncommon for a delegate to hang up a poster taken at a meeting in her yurt and explain its meaning to the women gathered at her place. “In the tracts of Balyk-Tuyul and Kumurtak, the delegates introduce cleanliness in the dwellings, wash the dishes and wash themselves and do this in a demonstrative manner, that is ... the dishes are clean, BUT when they call in, they wash them again in front of their eyes. " (From the report of the women's department). These and similar facts indicate that, of course, it would be wrong to limit the significance of delegate meetings to the tasks of creating and educating women’s activists, although from this side they do a great job. Delegate meetings are already exerting a tremendous cultural influence on the entire female population of the region, re-educating her, informing her of new ideas and reorganizing her life. This position can be illustrated by a number of facts in addition to the above. Here are the most typical ones. The Antela delegates carry the children to the hospital, refusing the help of the kama, and send them to schools. In the same place, two delegates made a barnyard out of an abandoned yurt, saying: "There will be more and fatter milk," says the book and said so at the meeting. One delegate reports to her voters: “My dishes 3 times a week, I sweep the floor every day, I shake out my tulak” (sheepskin under the seat). Delegates of Ku-lada on an artel basis ordered a sewing machine. The Balyk-Tuyul delegates insisted that the Local Cooperation open a mother-and-child shelf, promising to phase out cow teats. The delegates of Chelushman and Kumurtak collected 4 poods of wheat, sowed it and harvested it for the elderly and homeless. In a number of places, delegates are sowing collective gardens. Moreover, once the awakened women's initiative is itself looking for shortcomings and holes in public affairs and is seeking to correct them. In one district, at the insistence of the delegates, boiling water was given to schoolchildren, firewood was brought in, and the school was repaired. In another (Anos), a group of delegates during the election campaign identified a speculator and achieved the deprivation of his voting rights. In many places the delegates brought their neighbors to the re-election. On the question of the influence of delegate meetings on the reorganization of everyday life, such decisions are interesting, for example: “To ask and persuade husbands to build huts, try to introduce cleanliness in yurts, take better care of children, to wash their shirts "(Ulagan), or such a characteristic fact: the Altai people of the Gordub tract decided to switch to the saddle and persuaded their husbands to do so. All of the above facts and many others that have been scattered throughout the region in recent years are not yet widespread. parts, these are single lights, flashing here and there, along the mountains and valleys of Altai, in individual ailas or tracts, often extinguishing and not yet flaring up into a powerful movement.But one must not forget, on the other hand, the colossal revolutionizing significance of these separate flashes for the oirat, who is downtrodden and has not yet managed to free herself from the age-old darkness and the stifling oppression of pre-revolutionary life. These flashes illuminate her way forward. work among women is not limited to employment. It is also necessary to note mass women's meetings, evenings of handicraft and spinning (gatherings. Women's meetings organized either on an aimag scale or in individual districts, in general, resemble delegate meetings, differing from the latter only in their coverage. The main frame here is delegates. These meetings are timed usually to some significant events in Oirat everyday life, [for example, the celebration of Women's Day or “Harvest Day.” Their influence on the reconstruction of everyday life and on the involvement of new layers of the female population in the work of delegate [meetings is confirmed by a significant increase! among the Oirat of interest in public work and identifying a number of new women activists from their midst. ”Handicraft evenings, in most cases gathering around women youth (Chemal) and spinning gatherings, attracting more elderly people (Ulala, On-gudai), are also successful among the female population, accompanied by conversations , mainly! sanitary and educational nature, or popular agricultural egg reports giving a number of practical instructions. In 1926, after 12 gatherings, 265 people were allowed to pass. The average attendance at such evenings is expressed, therefore, in 20-25 people. The work of women-legalizers in relation to conducting mass conversations should be especially highlighted. In 1926, 154 such conversations were held, including 39 specifically among Altai women. Work of this kind is also being carried out among the nomads through the assistance of Special nomadic agitators. The activity of the latter extends to the whole aimak, and he travels to separate natural boundaries, stopping every 2-3 days. Their service to the female population is, in most cases, an individual character or the character of a conversation with a small number of participants. In 1926, nomadic organizers conducted 53 conversations with 367 people in Ongudai, 46 conversations with 425 hours in Ulagan. From March to August 1927, 2,020 women were served and 531 conversations were held. | A striking indicator of the influence that all this work has on the female population of Oi-ratiya is, in addition to the above facts of the reconstruction of everyday life, also the participation of women in elections to councils. The figures that we will now cite, although they cannot be called comforting in their absolute value, nevertheless emphasize the lack of [the increasing activity of women, and in this sense are as indicative as examples of the transition to a new way of life. In 1924, 2,849 women participated in the elections, or 15.5% of the total number of those who participated in the elections, and in 1925 there were already 6,498 women, which accordingly increased the percentage of women participating in the elections to 38.7%, i.e. more than! 2 'times. Unfortunately, we do not have at our disposal data on the percentage of Russians and Oiratok throughout the region. But here is information about this ratio for one of the districts, which is probably typical for the entire region. There are 845 women out of 1.350 of all female voters. Of this number, 619 women took part in the elections, including 390 women. The participation of women in the work of councils is calculated in the following figures: in 1926, 135 women took part in the Aimak congresses of councils (against 79 in 1925), there were 10 women in the Aimak executive committees, 2 women in the revision commissions, and in cooperative bodies - 12 and In others (school councils, hospitals) - 26 women. The reports on the election campaign note an undoubted increase in women's activity, especially shown by the participants in delegate meetings. Many delegates brought their neighbors to the elections. In a number of places, the delegates, criticizing the activities of the village councils and giving instructions to the newly elected ones, pointed out, for example, that “the previous composition did not pay attention to women,” “the poor widows did not bother with any benefits,” demanding that these shortcomings be corrected in the work of the new council nurseries, etc. Summing up all of the above, we must first of all state the sharp difference between the position of the oiratka in the pre-revolutionary and post-revolutionary periods. If the new Soviet Oiratia inherited the difficult legacy of the old 'way of life, in the main it has not yet been broken even now, if a woman p now bears on her shoulders all the burden of housework and suffocates in the terrible conditions of housing mud, if her consciousness is still obscured by age-old slaughter and the habit of submitting Re-reasoning, if the male oppression makes her sometimes even fearfully shy away from the helping hand reaching out to her, an abyss has formed between the pre-revolutionary and modern Oirat. 'There was no movement for her, no hope of changing her position, no prospects. Here everything is in motion, everything is in change. 'Regardless of even (from her desire, the byratka fails to close herself in the circle of habitual rules, in the circle of semi-animal existence to which the old way of life was doomed to her. The rapid growth of the new society, the breakdown of the traditional way of life, traditional relations and traditional beliefs taking place around her, her best companions have already embarked on a new path promising such tempting prospects ahead of her. She still does not dare to follow them, still timidly looks around, listens, takes careful steps so that at the first hint of the danger of fearfully hiding in the usual female corner of the yurt. But she does not succeed in this one either. Her neighbor, seized by the pathos of building a New Life, rushes in to her, pulls her into a meeting, to elections, to a conversation, enthusiastically demonstrates her achievements, shows, explains, encourages, arouses her curiosity, awakens in her interest and introduces her to the great struggle for female emancipation. At their meetings such voices are heard: “We need to help the Soviet government”, “Soviet power of the Yaksha”, (good), “if there is war, Altai will go to war; no other government is needed. " "Still not possessing virtually all the full rights of a Soviet woman, still only embarking on the great path of new construction, she already closely ties her fate with the fate of Soviet power," she already firmly, with an unerring class instinct, knows that only with this power she If, thus, the assistance of broad masses of women, their full and unconditional sympathy and women's initiative, awakening to activity, guarantee a firm basis for Soviet policy, then those obvious shortcomings and gaps in work among women that are available. It is known that mistakes are made only where nothing is done. But there are mistakes that can be avoided, and which, in any case, must be quickly corrected. Among these kinds of mistakes, we must attribute some shortcomings in the work among the oirats. First, there is a completely insufficient amount of work on public health, in particular, on the protection of mothers and infants. Until recently, according to the information we have, there has been experience with only one nursery opened in one of the Oirat tracts, funded by the Red Cross of the Siberian Health Administration. This beginning, which is destined, no doubt, to play a huge role in the emancipation of the oiratka, from the very first steps showed all its vitality. In June 1926, when the nursery was opened, 194 children passed through them, including 36 from Yuyrat. But already in August, the number of Oirat children doubled. In a number In the districts, the female population itself puts forward demands on the organization of nurseries and on the arrangement of shelves for mothers and children in cooperatives (that is, the selection of all kinds of products, such as a nipple, sponges for washing, providing normal hygienic care for the child). Meanwhile, work in this area is developing at an insufficient pace. The lack of funds and workers, of course, explains this slowdown, but nevertheless in no way excludes the need for increased attention, in the "concentration of fire" on this sector of the women's front. Secondly, the situation with the elimination of the Oirats is completely unsatisfactory. illiteracy. The reports point to poor female attendance at the sites where men work as liquidators. In addition, they unanimously emphasize the lack of literature, the lack of posters and other manuals. Be that as it may, it is necessary to intensify the work to eliminate illiteracy, perhaps by creating special women's educational centers, as some delegates from the Oirat community suggest doing. True, in recent years the work on the elimination of illiteracy has been somewhat revitalized and measures have been taken to provide benefits! (posters were ordered and the regional department of engineering issued 5 brochures in the Altai language). Nevertheless, the total number of 362 women per 1231 students is clearly insufficient and does not correspond to both the sex ratio in Oiratiya and the lower literacy rate among the female half of the population of Oiratia. Thirdly, there is almost no work to attract Oirats into cooperation. Not to mention the almost complete absence of Oirat participation in the bodies of cooperative management, even the number of Oirats, members of the cooperation, is absolutely negligible and measured in insignificant numbers. limited to units (18 for 1926). This phenomenon is abnormal, especially if you accept the role of the court in the protection of women's rights, in the elimination of pre-revolutionary relations between a woman and a man on the basis of the new Soviet legality; In Ulal, it is true, there is also a legal section of the regional department, which includes 25 women, mostly Russians (20 of them have already done practical work as public prosecutors and defenders). But this, of course, is not enough. And in this area it is necessary to develop more energetic activity. Finally, fifthly, energetic anti-religious propaganda should be developed. The religious beliefs of the oiratka, darkening her consciousness and keeping her in constant fear, have an extremely negative impact on the process of her liberation and are at the same time a very formidable weapon in the hands of the kams, naturally restored after forgiving the policies of the Soviet regime. The latter contrasts them with witchcraft quackery — a hospital, their fantastic explanations of various phenomena — a popular book, their practice of appeasing evil spirits, in case of any economic adversity — agricultural training. It is possible that the insufficiently energetic struggle in this area is explained by the fear of sharply reviving the Kamov against themselves with their powerful influence on “backward groups of the population. But, on the one hand, the kams, representing the top of the old society and being the keepers of the old way of life, will still fight against female emancipation, whatever forms it takes. On the other hand, the Soviet regime is not on the path with the Kamas, even if they do not occupy a hostile position. Now, when the main reserves have already been accumulated, the cause of anti-religious propaganda must be advanced in battle. As we can see, there are shortcomings in the work. And these shortcomings are sometimes significant. Nevertheless, looking back at the path traveled, counting victories and defeats, evaluating enemies and allies, we can state with firm confidence that on the basis of the indisputable revival of the activity of the female population of Oiratia, the awakening of its TEIR, clear initiative, is a great thing! emancipation of the woman of this small, so unhappy in the past country, goes on a wide road. And the emancipation of the Oiratka is a guarantee of the socio-political and economic prosperity of Oiratia. When writing this brochure, in addition to ethnographic works, the author used materials provided by the Scientific Association of Oriental Studies at the Central Executive Committee of the USSR and the Department of Workers and Peasants of the Central Committee of the CPSU (b).