1. General outline of the region and population
Mari belong to the peoples of the Finnish tribe. Their former name, Cheremis, was left by them after the revolution as alien and not accepted among the Mari. The autonomous region of the Mari people, formed in 1921, included Krasnokokshaisky and Kozmodemyanovsky u. at. former Kazan province; parts of the Iranian and Urzhum y. at. Vyatka lips .; and part of the Nizhny Novgorod province. These areas are the main center of the Mari settlements. In addition, the Mari live in a number of localities that are not part of the region (provinces: Nizhny Novgorod, Kostroma, Vyatka, Perm, Siberia; in the Bashkir Republic, the Mari make up a large group of up to 85,000 people). The Mari region, divided into 9 cantons, has a population of 481.781 people. (according to the last census). Of these, the Mari make up about 53%, the Russians, about 42%, and the Tatars, 4%. There are more women than men: there are 125 women for every 100 men. For a long time, the Mari are divided into upland and meadow. The very name indicates that the two branches were placed in different living conditions. Meadow, living along the lowest coast of the Volga, and surrounded by forests, and upland, living in a more elevated and more favorable climate, have different physical characteristics and speak two dialects that are little understood to each other. The climatic conditions were more favorable for the upland mari, therefore they are healthier than the meadow ones. Meadows, living in swampy, unhealthy forests, over time lost their strength, weakened, and now represent a weaker type. Before coming to these places, the Mari occupied the best lands along the Volga, but constrained by the movement of Russian colonization and the resulting movement of other nationalities, were compressed in a small space. The area of ​​the Mari region is 20.315.6 square meters. km., and almost 2/3 of this amount is occupied by forests, mainly coniferous. If earlier these forests covered the entire space, now the forest continues to play a big role in the life of the Mari. Their small villages are lost in this harsh sea of ​​forests. Once the forest was their only breadwinner, and hunting was the only occupation. For whole weeks the Mari left his dwelling, going to hunt. Then he gradually turned to agriculture. The influence of neighbors - Russians and others - played a big role in this. But even now, hunting is one of the main activities of the Mari, along with fishing and forestry. The fact is that agriculture does not provide the Mari with sufficient means to live. The first reason for this is the infertility of the soil, as a result of which many villages, whose sandy lands cannot bear bread, are almost exclusively engaged in forestry. And the mari also doesn't have much land 1) if we take into account its quality. Plots of land, which were reclaimed from the forest with great difficulty, need careful processing and care. Leading his farm in a primitive way (only recently there has been a change towards more improved cultivation), often with the same tools that his distant ancestors used — the Mari could not cultivate his plot well. The land cultivated in a primitive way was always barely able to feed the Mari peasants. Hunger, which became their usual companion due to crop failures, various economic and administrative constraints that existed up to the October Revolution, led the Mari to degeneration. And the Mari, oppressed for hundreds of years, could not find a way out of this situation. All this made the Mari distrustful and withdrawn, and they rarely went outside their settlements. Only handicrafts associated with the forest (woodworking) were developed. In this respect (especially the timber-chemical industry), the Mari region is in one of the first places. Tar smoking (extraction of tar, coal, turpentine), felling and rafting of forest materials, are the occupations of a significant part of the population, during the time free from field work. Of the crafts, the Mari are engaged in blacksmithing, carpentry, turning, etc. Although the Mari were baptized in the 18th century, among them, until recently, their former pagan rituals have survived, mixed with outwardly perceived Christian rites. Christianization is one of the main goals of the tsarist government in relation to national minorities. Before the revolution, all the enlightenment of the Mari (very small in size) was concentrated in the hands of the church, or organizations dependent on it. The ultimate goal of this enlightenment was Russification and Christianization, in order to thereby turn the once independent people into obedient victims of the colonial claims of the Russian bourgeoisie. As for the external life of the Mari in the pre-revolutionary era, it is also not complicated. The dwelling consists of a hut, a barn for storing bread and household junk, and round enclosures for livestock. Outwardly, the huts are similar to the Russians, white in color, and the view of small Mari villages — white against the background of a forest — is a beautiful sight. But inside these huts are rather unsightly. The furnishings are sparse. Around the walls are bunks for sleeping and often eating. Therefore, on the bunks of the sun Felt and other bedding are almost always lying around. The most expensive things are kept inside the bunks. Sometimes there are shops instead of bunks. The national dress of men consists of a white woolen caftan, sometimes trimmed with a blue cord — in the summer it is something like a canvas hoodie, with many covers or embroideries of red calico along the hem and ends of the sleeves. The shirts are similarly white and embroidered. Marie love white. In the same way, they are accustomed to the embroidery that fills their costumes. A felt hat, a belt belt, thick, black onuchi and bast shoes complete the men's clothing. The woman's costume is similar to the man's. Its peculiarity is the heavy headdress of a Mari woman: —the head is wrapped in a white canvas, which is wound on a support like a shovel, with prominent horns or corners — sometimes such a headdress is degraded with coins. Such a dress is obligatory for married — girls simply put on white kerchiefs, and laces are woven into their braids, concentrated in the hands of the church, or organizations that depend on it. The ultimate goal of this enlightenment was Russification and Christianization, in order to thereby turn the once independent people into obedient victims of the colonial claims of the Russian bourgeoisie. As for the external life of the Mari in the pre-revolutionary era, it is also not complicated. The dwelling consists of a hut, a barn for storing bread and household junk, and round enclosures for livestock. Outwardly, the huts are similar to the Russians, white in color, and the view of small Mari villages — white against the background of a forest — is a beautiful sight. But inside these huts are rather unsightly. The furnishings are sparse. Around the walls are bunks for sleeping and often eating. Therefore, felt and other bedding are almost always lying on the bunks. The most expensive things are kept inside the bunks. Sometimes there are shops instead of bunks. The national dress of men consists of a white woolen caftan, sometimes trimmed with a blue cord — in the summer it is something like a canvas hoodie, with many covers or embroideries of red calico along the hem and ends of the sleeves. The shirts are similarly white and embroidered. Marie love white. In the same way, they are accustomed to the embroidery that fills their costumes. A felt hat, a belt belt, thick, black onuchi and bast shoes complete the men's clothing. The woman's costume is similar to the man's. Its peculiarity is the heavy headdress of a Mari woman: —the head is wrapped in a white canvas, which is wound on a support like a shovel, with prominent horns or corners — sometimes such a headdress is degraded with coins. Such a dress is obligatory for married — girls simply put on white kerchiefs, and laces with beads and coins are woven into their braids, and they decorate their necks with coins and beads; they wear wire earrings in their ears, several pairs and very long. For hundreds of years, the Mari kept intact their everyday features and customs, their lands, could not fight the exploitation and continuous economic ruin that the autocracy and Russian capital carried to the Mari village along with Russification and Christianization. Maris were mercilessly exploited by both Russian capitalists and local kulaks. The class stratification of the Mari village, which had intensified since the beginning of the 20th century, pushed out of the Mari themselves, more prosperous, kulak elements, who began to share with the Russian bourgeoisie the fruits of the robbery of the poor Mari masses. The latter had no way of organizing and were powerless to fight them. Only from time to time did it come to attempts at indignation. Since the 16th century. (when the Mari rebelled against Russian rule several times, after the conquest of Kazan), the opinion was established that the Mari are the most proud and independent people among other nationalities of the Volga region. In a number of popular revolutionary movements (Razinovshchina, Pugachevshchina), they took an active part. But these speeches could not change anything in their position. Another hundred and fifty years passed in the same oppressive atmosphere and the Mari did not even have enough strength to fight it. After the February revolution, the still completely unformed class consciousness of the poor Mari forced him to partly support the petty-bourgeois ideas of his intelligentsia and kulaks. However, even during the February Revolution, the Mari took a more leftist position than the neighboring Volga peoples. Even after 1905, the Mari awakened a desire to improve their economic situation. Under the conditions of old Russia, this striving could not, of course, be realized to any significant extent, but after the February revolution the questions of nation-building, economic and cultural, have risen to their full extent. At the 1st congress of small peoples of the Volga region (May 1917) Mari L. Ya. Mendiarov was nominated as a rapporteur on national and cultural issues for the entire congress. In June 1927, the 1st All-Russian Congress of the Mari was convened in Birsk. The Mari military organization is being created in Kazan; Since August 1917, the 1st newspaper in the Mari language "Uzhara" (Esser) has been published. But all these undertakings, more verbal than actual, went along the line of supporting the bourgeois revolution and did not bring the Mari real emancipation. When in August 1917 at the 2nd All-Russian At the congress of the peoples of the Volga region, representatives of the Mari raised the issue of organizing national military units — the government forbade them to think about it. All this soon opened Mari's eyes to the true nature of the February revolution and forced her to refuse to support the Esser-minded part of the Mari intelligentsia. At the soldiers 'and peasants' meetings of the Mari, this dissatisfaction with the policy of the interim government and the desire to defend the slogans of the already brewing October Revolution was most vividly expressed. Only the October Revolution, which brought genuine liberation to Mari, resolved all these painful issues. The class consciousness of the poor peasants is quickly taking shape; they no longer follow the lead of the intelligentsia and the kulaks, who continue to be hostile to Soviet power in the form of the Central Mari Union, which essentially fought against the Soviets. Poor rural strata not only refuse to support the latter, but join the struggle against them, defending the slogans of October, under the leadership of a small group of revolutionary intelligentsia, who joined the Bolsheviks. Special Red Army units are created from Mari (in Kazan). Feverish work began to educate the Mari-Red Army men and, as far as possible, the peasants. The advanced elements of the Mari people took an active part in the struggle against the White Guards. After the liberation of Kazan from Kolchak, even more energetic work began. The question of awakening the class consciousness of the peasant Marie became a priority. Mari departments were created in Kazan and Moscow to guide all the work. Local committees were organized for the poor. At the end of 1918, the first Mari community was organized in Kazan. The agitation work done during these first years of the revolution is great. For * one year (1918-1919), a significant number of brochures in the Mari language were published. The newspaper "Yoshkir Keche" was published, persistently pursuing the class point of view. Finally, in February 1920 — at the congress of the Mari — a decree was passed on the creation of a Mari autonomous unit, which was soon implemented. The young region had to begin its existence in difficult conditions. The famine that spontaneously swept over the region, which reduced its population by 2.4%, forest fires, from which many villages burned down, and a number of other circumstances created a significant decline in the economy. Until 1923, the Mari people are straining their efforts to eliminate these consequences in the first place. It can be considered that by 1923 the most urgent tasks in this direction were completed and starting from this year a new construction is underway, which manifests itself not only in solving economic, but also cultural problems, which was quite a rarity among the Mari. If we turn to economic construction, then over the past few years, significant achievements should be noted. Numerical data indicate that already in 1925 the pre-war norms in the area under crops were reached (94.33% in relation to 1913, while in 1922 it was only 34.50%). At the same time, a qualitative improvement is noted — an increase in the area of ​​cultivated crops, industrial crops and clover crops, as well as an increase in demand for improved agricultural crops. tools, almost unknown to the Mari village before the revolution. The number of livestock in 1925 also reached the average pre-war level. Cooperation with.-kh. population is the way to improve the economy. In the Mari region, on 1/1 of 1926!. 20% of farms were cooperative. Maroblast, which has large reserves of forests in the structure of its economy, aspires to use them. It should be considered a very positive fact that the restoration, albeit small, but in the situation of a significant region, of the timber and wood-chemical industries, in the pre-war volume. And now the Mari themselves can work in their factories, build their industry. The second, very positive, fact in this area is the provision of communication routes that are so necessary for the export of forest products. The construction of the Zeleny Dol-Krasnokokshaisk railway line (the main center of the Mar-region), connecting the region with sales markets, meets the urgent tasks of economic construction. Handicrafts are also recovering; Mari furniture and other wood products are entering the market in increasing numbers. Finally, beekeeping, which represented and makes up a significant part of the Mari national economy, has not only survived its recovery period, but is also improving in quality. It is interesting to note that if before the revolution there was a noticeable increase in relation to 1913, while in 1922 it was only 34.50%). At the same time, a qualitative improvement is noted — an increase in the area of ​​cultivated crops, industrial crops and clover crops, as well as an increase in demand for improved agricultural crops. tools, almost unknown to the Mari village before the revolution. The number of livestock in 1925 also reached the average pre-war level. Cooperation with.-kh. population is the way to improve the economy. In maris What region for 1/1 of 1926!. 20% of the farms were cooperated. It should be considered a very positive fact that the restoration, albeit small, but in the situation of a significant region, of the timber and wood-chemical industries, in the pre-war volume. And now the Mari themselves can work in their factories, build their industry. The second, very positive, fact in this area is the provision of communication routes that are so necessary for the export of forest products. The construction of the Zeleny Dol-Krasnokokshaisk railway line (the main center of the Mar-region), connecting the region with sales markets, meets the urgent tasks of economic construction. Handicrafts are also recovering; Mari furniture and other wood products are entering the market in increasing numbers. Finally, beekeeping, which represented and makes up a significant part of the Mari national economy, has not only survived its recovery period, but is also improving in quality. It is interesting to note that if before the revolution there was a noticeable increase in large business enterprises in beekeeping, now the size of individual apiaries has decreased, but their total number is increasing. economic construction, in turn, creates the basis for social and cultural construction. In this respect, things were catastrophic before the revolution. Diseases, raging in spontaneous proportions, could not be eliminated, at least partially, in the absence of a desire to improve the life of the Mari on the part of the tsarist government, with a complete almost absence of hospitals and education. They were afraid to look into the Mari village, imagining the Mari as “wild foreigners”. It is therefore important to note the continuous growth in recent years of the health authorities and the vigorous fight against mass diseases (trachoma, malaria, etc.), which has already yielded significant results. In the field of education, significant progress has also been achieved. There are a number of educational institutions of a special nature — pedagogical, agricultural, vocational, educational and demonstration schools, 7-year, 9-year, etc. and 390 grade I schools (1/1-26). To characterize the significance of educational work mari — indicative of 0/0 of them, studying in schools of the first stage. As it grew, it approached the% of the Mari population in the region (by 1 / XN — 26 in schools of the 1st grade — 12.888 Mari, in 7-year-olds — 2135, etc.). Mari constitute the majority in 3 party schools in the region. Thus, if earlier there was no way out for Mari from the ignorance that surrounded them, now the situation has completely changed- (it has changed. The younger generation is quickly getting rid of this ignorance, prejudices, learning to build their lives in a completely different way through the Komsomol, school and political educational institutions.If before the revolution all the meager literature in * the Mari language consisted, for the most part, in translations of various kinds of "sacred" scriptures, and countless "lives of the saints", now not only the amount of literature is incomparable with the previous one, but also in its own way content, it touches on the issues that are most understandable, interesting and necessary for the Mari peasant, student and other groups of the population. ” course towards an alliance with the poor-middle peasant groups, with the active support of which it can be Work on the economic and cultural liberation of the Mari has been completed. Their main task - the awakening of the class consciousness of the poor peasant elements of the Mari village, which, as we have seen, always stood as the main one - is carried out with sufficient clarity and its results are undoubtedly significant. With the inevitably sharpened class differentiation of the Mari village in recent years, the poor strata continue, under the leadership of the party, to play a predominant role in economic and cultural development. The Mari Komsomol, in addition to all this, has big tasks in the fight against everyday abnormalities by involving into its ranks for a certain creative and useful work, the very Mari youth, who previously spent most of their free time in aimless going to gatherings, etc. which, moreover, are often carriers of infection. The Komsomol has done a lot in this respect, raising its importance in the eyes of the Mari peasant and attracting more and more young people into its ranks, However, even such significant work done in each separate branch of the Mari economy and culture has not yet made the position of the latter completely happy. It will take many more years to achieve this. The former Congress of Soviets of the Wasp Region in March 1926 he was especially attentive to the issues of economic and cultural development of the Mari. Having noted the above achievements, he still had to admit the situation is still quite difficult, having come to the following conclusions: 1) The economy of the Mari is natural, has almost no industrial crops and is characterized by weak marketability. 2) The economy of the Mari is largely conducted in a primitive manner “like fathers and grandfathers led.” 3) Primitiveness in the economy associated with a variety of everyday habits and superstitions gives insignificant economic results, which is why the economy of the Mari peasant lags behind the economy of his neighbors, Russians and Tatars.4 ) Satisfaction of the cultural and social needs of the Mari depends on its economy. 5) Teaching children, their literacy, is recognized as necessary only for the knowledge of counting, money. Only in the presence of a surplus of working hands in the family is the luxury of giving education permissible, and then only with the aim of receiving material support from him for the household at the end of the course, when he will be a “clerk, teacher or priest.” 6) Women's education is almost not recognized. As a result, out of a hundred literate people in the oblast, there are Mari, men — 29.6%, women — 7%; Russian men - 51.2%, and women - 26%. The plight of the Mari in terms of health was also noted, especially children under 15 years of age, etc. It seems to us that these conclusions are in some respects much more acute, than necessary, and the actual situation is somewhat better. If we compare it with the pre-revolutionary one, then this improvement will be very significant — it has already been mentioned. The same congress outlined a number of further measures to raise the economic and socio-cultural condition of the Mari people, created a special section to study the issues of the Mari economy and culture. In particular, in the field of agriculture, a task has been set for the transition to the 10th anniversary of the region (1931) of half of all farms in the multifield. The task is also to create a more significant timber industry in the region.

2. Life and everyday life of a Mari woman before the revolution
The pre-revolutionary way of life of the Mari, which, as we see, largely persists to this day, creates a number of features in the position of a Mari woman. Mariyka has long been accustomed to hard work, which she performs on a par with a man. She works as much as he does in the field, and she also helps him in forestry work. She also bears the brunt of the homework. As in the distant past, when the Mari, fighting for their land with their neighbors, or hunting in wide-scattered forests, often left home for whole weeks, so now he often goes to forest trades. In such cases, the entire household is left to the woman. And the Mari woman, no worse than a man, learned how to manage him and do all kinds of work. This, however, does not lead to an improvement in her position and the man does not consider her to be his equal. She is only f {his slave, obliged to do the job. The man is the head of the family and he controls everything. Therefore — learning is useless for a woman — she does not manage money affairs — and rarely leaves her village. She must be a good housewife and needlewoman. The consequence of this is that 93% of Mariek are illiterate. The life of a Mari is both unsightly and uncomplicated. She follows the paths determined by custom, to deviate from which is considered the greatest crime. Most often, in a small, low and smoky hut, with a dirty floor, without any decoration, only with simple bunks, a Mari girl is born with the help of a midwife's grandmother, who to this day continues to enjoy great authority in the Mari village. The child receives a teat from a rag with chewed bread, and is entrusted with the supervision of older children, and often grows up without any supervision. A large percentage of children. (In such antihygienic conditions, without sufficient care, they die in infancy. For those who remain alive, working life begins from early childhood — study, but not at school. From 6-7 years of age Mariyka is still quite a child, she begins to learn sewing, as the most necessary occupation. In addition, she helps her mother with household chores and babysitting her younger children. ; but this is not the point, but the evil that it brings. This evil is so great that its influence affects the whole life of the Mari. Trachoma, a disease so common among the Mari, is more common among women and girls, moreover in a stronger and a more neglected form than men. Likewise, many women, not being old, suffer from blindness. The study continues for almost 10 years - until the time when the girl becomes a bride. bot requiring careful finishing of the smallest parts. Embroidery, which seems so original on Mari shirts, towels, fabrics belts and women's headdresses, often consisting of double, complex embroidery, not only takes away a significant part of her working life, but also destroys her health. A Mari woman should spend at least a day on embroidery of one men's shirt, other things sometimes require even more time. All kinds of handicrafts (stringing beads and hanging coins, weaving belts, etc.) turn out to be just as long and painstaking work. In total, a Mari woman spends almost half of her working life on preparing clothes, so all the work, from processing flax or hemp to sewing, lies with her. That is why in the upbringing of a Mari girl, training in needlework and making clothes is central. “He doesn't even know handicrafts” is the worst comment about a Mari girl. As a bride, she is less valued if she is a poor needlewoman. Long before the wedding, she begins to prepare all kinds of good - to embroider hats, towels, women's and men's shirts. These things are intended to give gifts to relatives and family members of her future husband, during and after the wedding. Happier and richer brides are considered to have prepared more of this good. A matchmaker or a matchmaker praises such a bride to the groom and his relatives: “clever, meek, needlewoman, embroiderer, has so many shirts, so many towels, so many shimaksh” (headdresses). Wedding songs glorify such girls: "achazhdechat mastar, abazhdechat mastar" - that is, in her skill she surpassed both her father and mother. In wedding ceremonies, the remnants of the old way of life, when the woman was completely enslaved, are still preserved. The girl's consent was not needed at all to marry her off. This consent was given for her by her father, who received a kalym (ransom) for her. The custom of kalym, as well as bride kidnapping, is preserved in some places to this day. Abduction does not exempt from the ransom, but only diminishes it and simplifies wedding ceremonies. It is interesting to note the pagan wedding ceremonies that prevailed in the past, and to some extent persist to our time. The marriage took place among the pagan Mari in the courtyard or in the open air, near the tent set up for this. A table with a loaf of bread was set near her, beetroot beer, salt and lighted candles. The priest led the bride and groom to the table and read wedding prayers, asking the spirits to send them happiness and love. During this prayer, those present bow to the ground. At the end of the ceremony, the matchmaker led the young woman into the tent, and putting a woman's headdress on her head, took her back. Then the feast began. As for the divorce, then it was done simply according to the old customs. For this, 6 witnesses were needed, and the divorce was considered completed after a series of ceremonies. In the songs of the Mari, echoes of the past are vividly preserved, when the Tatars abducted the Mariek. The Tatars, apparently, contributed to the spread of the custom of bigamy and polygamy in general among a part of the Mari. However, this did not become any widespread custom. We see that from early childhood the Mari woman is regarded as a worker, her strength and skill are valued in her. The ability to run a household, to embroider, etc. — all this does not require, according to the concept of Mari-men, that a woman should go to school. All matters for which knowledge is required are done by a man. This view was established over time and turned into a custom against which the woman did not try to object until the October Revolution. On the contrary, the Mari mother herself denied the benefits of enlightenment, and did not send her daughters to school, thinking that since she had lived a century without literacy, her daughter and him would live. In addition, they were afraid that the "learned" girls would not obey the demands of their parents well. Ignorance was and still is the main negative fact in the life of a Mari woman. It, in turn, supports the superstitions that are so characteristic of the Mari. There was even a saying about their superstition: "Mari's job is to conjure and whisper." The woman takes an active part in these whispers and witchcraft. Although communication with spirits according to the concept of mari should be performed by the eldest man in the family, often a woman, without waiting for him to perform the rituals. In such cases, she puts on her husband's hat and, as it were, transfers to herself the right to communicate with spirits. In general, this once again emphasizes the humiliated position of a woman who is unworthy of communion with spirits. There were even rituals in which women were forbidden, but all the more she needed to be afraid of all these spirits and load them up. Therefore, sorcerers and sorceresses, taking advantage of the darkness and ignorance of the Mari, easily deceived her. This is how the work and duties of the Mari are distributed, taking all of her time. Always almost busy with work, she ceases to notice the oppressive environment that reigns around her, supported by economic backwardness, ignorance and superstition. And instead of fighting her, she supports her. The humiliation of the Mari in the family, in addition to the fact that the old customs make her disenfranchised in the sense of allocating property, etc., is also characterized by a number of harmful customs. A number of them, understandable in the conditions of life that the Mari led in ancient times, are completely unnecessary and harmful now. Especially harmful are the customs that do not allow a married woman to show her bare legs and bare head in front of her elders. Their preservation entails disastrous consequences for health. Mari hair, braided tightly in braids and wrapped gathered in one place, on the crown of the head, temples or on the forehead, is covered with a heavy headdress. From the constant wearing of this headdress, hair, deprived of access to air, splits. In places where the headdress (shimaksh) is strengthened, bald patches are formed, and some parts of the head, for example, the front part, when worn. 1. Mountain Mariiks for combing flax. Shimaksha on the crown of their heads remain constantly open, from which they are exposed to frequent diseases. Nopu are all the time shod in black woolen onuchi, they also undergo diseases and become unnaturally thin. It is quite natural that under such conditions of life, there could be no question of the participation of a Mari woman in public life, at least in the most modest sizes. The external life that took place behind the 4 walls of the hut was of little concern to her; only from rumors (manege) and gossip she drew her awareness of the outside world. These rumors, connected with prejudice, condemned the slightest deviation from custom and strengthened everything old. Mariika before the revolution is a support of superstition and is fanatically religious. She raised her children in the same spirit. Mariyka supplied sorcerers, fortune tellers and clairvoyants from her ranks, only as an exception, professional healers were men. These sorcerers, who knew the Mari woman, her customs, easily found their way into her thoughts and into her pocket. Life among the harsh forests, perhaps, even more reflected on the woman than on the man. In this regard, it is interesting to note the Mari folk art, which surpasses the creativity of neighboring nationalities in its level. We have already said how much time a Mari woman devotes to embroidering and decorating various things. In this work, a forest always stands before us, the harsh poetry of which is closest to the Mari life. With a simple geometric ornament, with a few but expressive tones, the Marika conveys the rich content of nature and makes it often see the inclinations of genuine creativity. This creativity, even in those unbearably difficult conditions that surrounded the Mari woman for centuries, she managed to preserve and bring it to our time. What did the Mari woman give those few hours of leisure, which, although rare, were encountered in her life? Here, too, we encounter deeply ingrained habits to which free time is given. If this is a girl, then she goes to gatherings, or games, which most often do not bring her anything useful and good. On the contrary, gatherings sometimes turn into carriers of infectious diseases and not particularly moral habits, as a result of the desire to spend a "good" youth, in anticipation of a difficult married life, although it must be said that the Mari condemn extramarital sex and the birth of illegitimate children. Adults usually turn a blind eye to the harmful aspects of these customs, because they know from themselves that only in their youth there is time for a Mari to have fun, to live “well”. The old way of life does not give anything that could replace them. With marriage, this entertainment ends, and this is the only entertainment that is available to the Mari, and instead of gatherings, the Mari woman while away leisure time with her neighbors, reinforcing her superstition here. In manezh-rumors, she gives her soul and grief to the woman who dares to do something reprehensible from the point of view of the Mari village. All her bones will be washed, and when she appears on the street, various whispers will rush after her. It should be noted, at the same time, the exceptional isolation of the Mari. As she did not try to protest against the old customs, she was also not used to turning anywhere for protection. In addition, pre-revolutionary laws and authorities did little to protect her from a number of difficult customs and powerless position. And if the Mari men nevertheless sometimes tried to protest against their oppression and were considered freedom-loving, then the woman had only to observe it from the outside. Thus, despite the fact that at work, at home and in the field, a Mari woman is not inferior to a man, and often works even more than him, she was never recognized as a full member of society or family. She had to obey her husband unquestioningly, and follow the customs of antiquity, often harmful and humiliating. In the same way, a Mari girl had to completely obey her father, and even when she got married, she should not be guided by her desires, following the orders of older men. was considered as a worker, as a bought and sold labor force. During her life in the family, as they said, her dependence on her elders, the need to obey them, were also emphasized in every possible way. These are the few words that describe the life of a Mari woman before the revolution. One should not forget the picture of this everyday life, in many parts of it persisting even now, when one has to get acquainted with the work to emancipate the Mari, which has been done in these few years after the revolution. We must not forget all the complexity of work in such an environment, when it meets everywhere with terrible economic and domestic backwardness, only by extortion of which we can say that the task is completed. However, the awakening of activity in the Mari, the awakening of its social class consciousness, this work is largely already done. We will try to consider it on the following pages.
3. Work among the Marieks during the years of the revolution
The October Revolution created objective opportunities for improving the position of the Mari, her emancipation From the very first day of the October Revolution, the activity of the Mari awakens, work is expanding widely and captures such a previously completely abandoned world of women. Work among women has begun systematically only in the last 3-4 years. The famine of 1921, when 5-6 people died every day in some villages, a number of natural disasters that joined it forced all attention to be focused on them. But it should be noted that this same famine contributed to the further rapprochement of the Mari with the Russian proletariat and peasantry, accelerated it. The great help rendered to them by the center, as well as by the peasants of the Ivanovo-Voznesensk and Kostroma provinces, speaks of this rapprochement. After the liquidation of the consequences of the famine, it became possible to start in-depth work on other fronts. It would seem difficult to expect great results from her, but they are on the face. The new way of life is being introduced into the consciousness of the Mari not immediately, but gradually. The Soviet government gave the Mari women equality in family life, property and other rights, but it was necessary to translate all this into reality, to put it into practice. The difficulty lay in the lack of culture, downtroddenness and isolation of the Mari, generated by the economic situation of her life. Here is what the workers among the Mariek say: “Her isolation, distrust, and shyness are more developed in her than in the Russian peasant woman. You cannot approach a Mari woman at once, she will not open her soul to you; before she will take a closer look at you, listen, learn the opinion of neighbors; having learned from all sides, seeing that they want to do something good for her, she, like a child, will reach out to you, reveal all the sore sides of her nondescript life, go to work, and take an active part in the social life of the village. " These features were supposed to leave their mark on the entire work. The Mari peasant woman needed people who knew her way of life, her language, she needed workers who spent a long time with her so that she would abandon her isolation. And of course, at first it was difficult to provide the village with such workers. They just weren't there. After all, the Mari woman was in such conditions that she did not even think about social work. Meanwhile, it was the Mari village, with its backward way of life, and at the same time with the developing class stratification, that demanded the organization of women, their early involvement in this life and struggle. The main work among the Marie peasant women was at first difficult. Zhenotdels, in most cases, extended their activities more to urban areas, where there are only a few Mari people. Such an unusual form for a Mari village, such as delegate meetings, took root slowly. By habit, Marika sat at home and it was difficult to involve her in meetings, even those where the most painful issues for her were discussed. Delegate meetings grew gradually, like islands in this endless sea of ​​old life and customs, with which they had to wage a decisive struggle. Dai delegates were originally numbered in units. The smallest number of them was at first in the village. But work among Mariekas is work among peasant women. The lack of a wide coverage of the peasant masses was the main drawback of the first period of work. The small number of women's departments, the lack of workers in them, was one of the most important reasons for the lack of sufficient work in the countryside. The Mari peasant woman herself needed a lot of preliminary agitation work. A careful and skillful approach was needed. Work was carried out in the first period, most often through the convening of conferences, there was no firm plan and systematicity. Delegate meetings represented something unprecedented for a Mari village — peasant women only gradually got used to seeing them as their school. The main question of the success of the delegate meetings was, therefore, the question of the involvement of the Mariaks, for at first the overwhelming majority were Russians, while the Mariiks were numbered in a few. Only after being attracted to delegate meetings, they could then be involved in the work of Soviet institutions and in public life in general. The growth figures of the participants in these meetings are an indicator of success in involving the Mari women in public life and Soviet construction. If five years ago there were only 116 delegates, of which there was an insignificant percentage of Marieks (no more than 10%), then by October 1926 this number had increased almost 15 times, and the percentage of Marieks-peasants in it was brought to half of the entire composition ... The work, which thus began with the involvement of individuals, has now shifted into the area of ​​involvement of the widest masses. In particular, a lively work has been done on delegate meetings in recent years. Planning and regularity have already been introduced into this work. The election of delegates is going on lively, with the unrelenting active participation of all the poor and middle peasants of the Mari village. The adoption of a firm course for in-depth work among the Mariek peasant women was marked by a number of very important events. Together with growth of delegate meetings, more and more embracing the Mari village — the work takes them beyond them and embraces the Mariiks who are not organized in delegate meetings. Suffice it to point out that since March 1926, 180 meetings of peasants have been held, in which, in addition to the delegates, 3,600 peasant women participated. Following the grassroots meetings, district and canton women's non-party conferences were held; It is interesting to note that the last Mariiks accounted for 3/4. These events revived the work, linking delegates' meetings with the ordinary mass of Mariik peasants with close ties: the fact that they passed alive; the isolation of the latter is destroyed before our eyes. A number of issues on the agenda, closely related to the life of the Mari, deeply interested the peasant women. In addition to conferences, the department of workers and peasants established a close relationship with the village, which is carried out not only in the form of written guidance, but also live instruction and direct communication with the places. The last one. 'is permanent. Regular visits to the village are carried out by the women's department, and in addition, a number of comrades have made numerous visits and work in rural areas specially assigned to them. Communists, Komsomol members and delegates from the city take part in this work. In addition, systematic conversations are held. reading and group work among Marieki women not covered by the delegates' meeting. These conversations strive to give the peasant woman understandable, close and at the same time interesting material to her — questions of everyday life, agricultural issues, etc. Since March 1926, 101 such conversations have been held. On a regional scale, several “In order to get as close as possible to the Mari department of the region, it was decided to organize all the work in the Mari language (holding delegate meetings in the Mari regions, etc.). This task required the nomination of a cadre of organizers of women's work from among the Marieks themselves. In 1926, of the total number of organizers, the mari accounted for 55/0. In addition to instructive and agitation-organizational work, women who are not involved in delegate meetings are ‘united along purely practical undertakings. Peasant women’s corners and handicraft circles were created. Such events are extremely important in the environment of a Mari village - a Mari woman is a natural-born needlewoman I willingly goes to needlework circles, while the latter create a good basis for political and educational work. With a cultural and educational purpose, "red work sittings" are organized. They have; . its goal is to combat the aimless pastime of every Mari girl, expressed in traditional gatherings. The dangers of the latter have already been discussed. Therefore, the organization {"red work sittings", where girls both work and are brought up, freeing themselves from the burden of age-old prejudices, is a matter of particular importance in the Mari village. It should be noted here that, as soon as the Mari woman understands the essence of such events, she does her best to support them. It has already been said about those fragments of the old way of life that still gravitate over the Mari. We have seen their harmfulness and antihygiene — for example, clothing. The custom of wearing a heavy headdress is firmly rooted in the Mari village, and such a seemingly simple matter as fighting it is put on the line as an extremely important issue, the resolution of which requires a lot of energy. Through the work of the delegates' meeting, conversations, campaigns are systematically conducted for updating the Mari costume, for replacing it with a more convenient and hygienic one. The results of this work are already showing. Among the Marieks there are such brave loners who throw off their age-old clothing and replace it with a more modern one. Recently, the transition of this movement from the stage of isolated successes to more significant results has been outlined. The Mari also enjoys the rights that the October Revolution won for her, the right to economic separation in case of divorce, etc. If earlier she was completely deprived of rights in relation to use property, now she is aware of this right and often appeals to the department of workers and peasant women with a request to protect her property and other interests. Gradually, the Mari people are being drawn into other professions, which constituted the monopoly of men before the revolution. It should be noted that not only grassroots organizations have achieved great success in involving Mariaks in their apparatus. In the cantonal women's departments, as well as in the leadership of delegate assemblies, the Mari is a majority. Such a composition makes them closer to the Mariika and serves as a guarantee of more successful work. The work of the delegate meetings is the most indicative, for it is the nucleus that groups all the active Mariika women around itself. However, what is described here is only part of the great work that has been done during the years of the revolution in all areas of the struggle for the emancipation of the Mari. Delegate meetings, teaching the Mari to participate in public life, to the Soviet construction, nominate the active women for direct participation in this construction, involving them in the work of party, Soviet and professional institutions. This work of involvement turns out to be the most difficult. An illiterate, downtrodden Mari woman has been withdrawn from any social life for too long and does not soon learn to take part in it. Often she wants this, but she still feels incapable, weak, to work actively. Therefore, the Mari people in the party are still a rare phenomenon (no more than 2%). But even here, in recent years, great opportunities have been outlined for involving the Marieks in the party, since in the near future the number of them - those who have passed the school of delegate meetings, the school of practical work in a number of Soviet organizations - will undoubtedly increase, and they will feel sufficiently prepared for the party work. The situation is somewhat better with the involvement of Mariek girls in the Komsomol. Here, first of all, it is necessary to note the great attraction to the Komsomol on the part of the girls themselves, who are already dissatisfied with the old way of life. They are looking for a new, participation in public life. However, there are a number of obstacles that need to be removed. One of the obstacles is the opposition of parents who disagree with the violation of traditional foundations, who are afraid that a girl who has ended up in the Komsomol or in general 'for public work, ceases to obey her parents. Therefore, they often do not allow their daughters to attend peasant meetings, etc. In this respect, a lot of work is done through the aforementioned handicraft circles, which enjoy great sympathy among the peasant masses. There, the girl can receive the guidance she is looking for, wanting to break with the old way of life that weighs on her. In terms of the growing attraction of girls to public life, the fact of her participation in various conferences and congresses is indicative. So at the regional congress of Mari women in March 1926, many girls were present, and the question of work among them naturally attracted the attention of the congress, which pointed out the role of needlework schools, as well as the desirability of attracting cells of the Komsomol and school workers. The involvement of Mariek women in Soviet construction is yielding good results. Gradually, both the lower and central apparatus are being covered. The activity of women working in the Soviet apparatus is growing all the time, and the increase from year to year in the number of women elected to councils shows that they have managed to justify the confidence placed in them. If the campaign for re-election of councils in the early years (1921-23) attracted a not particularly significant number of women, then in the campaign of 1925-26, women accounted for 25% of all voters. Women took an active part in the congresses of the councils, volost, canton and regional. The number of women elected to councils and other elected organizations (cooperatives, etc.) is constantly growing. If in 1922/23 22 peasant women were elected to the district councils, then in 1925/26 the number of those elected only to the village councils reached 377 people. Accordingly, the percentage of Marieks (of the total number of women) is growing. (Thus, in 1926, out of 148 delegates elected to various institutions, 60 were Mariaks.) You often come across stories in our press about how a Mari woman is gaining equality. The emancipation of the Mari outside the Mar-region follows approximately the same paths. Even in Bashkiria, far from Maroblast, where a group of Mari lives, preserving their national identity, this movement is taking over the Mari. So among the population of a number of villages, the Mari girl Ekalcha won great authority, at the age of 22 she became the chairman of the village council. The story of this girl is similar to the stories of many Mariek social activists. In 1923 she was completely illiterate. Elected as a delegate, she eliminated her illiteracy, then she was elected to the village council, and soon also to the chairperson.1 She established herself as an active, good worker, and not for nothing at village meetings, * you only hear exclamations: "Ekalcha", "Ekalcha ! " Mariyka begins to occupy public elective positions not only in councils, but also in cooperation bodies, judiciary, trade unions, etc. The figures at the end indicate the extent of this participation. The huge percentage (93%) of illiteracy among Mariiks makes it a question of education very urgent. This also makes it difficult to solve. It cannot be said that everything necessary was done here. But what has already been done is absolutely extraordinary in the setting of an almost entirely previously illiterate Mari village. School education was almost non-existent for the Mari before the revolution. But from the first days after the revolution, the Mari, albeit slowly, began to conquer the school, and the further, the faster this conquest goes. The number of Mariek students in grade I schools is growing all the time. Gradually, the Mari woman is making her way to the secondary school, although so far in smaller numbers than in the first stage schools. She even goes to higher educational institutions now, and every year she gives several dozen marieks sent to various educational institutions. In universities, the Mari woman shows herself to be very capable. In the work of national communities created by the university young people almost everywhere outside the region where the Mari study, x) the Marian takes an active part. Many, probably, had to meet with such Mari social activists, students in universities. The Mari woman took an active part in staffing various courses that have been in the region in recent years (obstetric school, courses for training village workers, courses for nursery workers, as well as political schools). If, already in 1926, 2,500 Mariek girls were enrolled in grade I schools * 2), this means "a great achievement on the front of education. Work is also systematically developing to eradicate illiteracy among the adult population through 190 educational centers available in the region. I had to pro, to do work to eliminate illiteracy among the Mariik delegates. If we compare this with the pre-revolutionary time, when a Mari woman did not dream not only of secondary or higher, but also of a lower school, it must be said that the work of cultural liberation of Mariikn gives nice results. A lot of preliminary work was needed so that the Mari woman understood the need for enlightenment and went to study herself. And here the revival of work has been falling for the last two years. Until 1924-25, it was rare to meet a Mari woman in courses, in schoolchildren, circles, etc. — recently it ceases to be new and she, for the most part, goes on her own — asks to be taught or sent to study ... It is interesting to note that the male Mari, who had previously looked so unkindly at attempts at enlightenment, have recently begun to treat this more favorably. After a conversation with one organizer of women in a Mari village, the men told her: “You were telling the truth, we need to teach our women,” and asked her to come again. It remains to get acquainted with one more, also very important area of ​​work - health care and, in particular, the protection of mothers and infants ... In particular, the latter is important, since the primary task is to wrest the Mari out of this oppressive environment in which he still grew up and teach the Mari to take care of their children not with the help of the barbaric means of village midwives and healers. the Mari village is gradually being replaced by medical care. Already, about 10% of births take place with the help of midwives or doctors. The cadres of midwives trained by the obstetric technical school - in most of the Marieks, it is hoped, will finally nullify the importance of midwives and healers. And, finally, it is important to teach the Mari to seek medical help, to shake her faith in “native” medicine. In this regard, educational work plays an important role. The medical staff, in addition to their current work, have to turn to the fight against this "indigenous" medicine, which, although it is not widespread now, but in remote places remains in all its strength. The main scourge of the Mari village is the rapid spread of domestic diseases, aggravated unsanitary conditions and ignorance. These include trachoma, scabies, and malaria. Trachoma is more developed in meadow mari. According to the health department, about 25% of Mari is infected with trachoma. The fight against it is being conducted so vigorously that it is already possible to talk about its final elimination in the near future. An increasingly significant number of patients are beginning to use medical help leading them to recovery. The work on the line of health education is carried out by the joint efforts of the medical staff and the women's work bodies -] by arranging lectures, conversations, systematic,; instructing, etc. And here the Mari woman takes a great part in the work in the person of her delegates. In 1925, a traveling exhibition on the care and feeding of a child was organized in the region. This is how a Mari woman learns how to care for children. However, before achieving success in this area too, we had to face the opposition of the old way of life, expressed in little sympathy, at first, on the part of the Mari for health measures and institutions for the protection of mothers and infants. So, for example, at first, the Mari people never wanted to send their children to a nursery, since they did not even understand their meaning well. In 1922, there were a number of cases when peasant women did not want to carry their children in organized, equipped and fully equipped village nurseries. The nursery was empty and the next year they did not open in these places. And only after a series of explanatory campaigns, which were able to explain to the Mari woman all the usefulness of this undertaking, she began to willingly send children to a nursery. Every year 36 crèches function in the region during the summer. The courses for the training of nursery workers, which gave many trained nursery workers from among the Mariiks themselves, further strengthened the importance of the nursery in the eyes of the population.It should be noted another fact that significantly contributed to the popularity of institutions for the protection of mothers and infants among the population and their actual approach to the mass of Mari. In 1926, in the midst of the Mari population, in Arbany, where anti-sledges flourished most brightly Tariya and ignorance was translated "baby's house", from now on began to serve exclusively the Mari population. Consultation, both medical and legal, is widely used through the authorities of the okhmatmlad. Mariyka learns to seek advice on various issues, begins to see her defenders in maternity protection institutions. Councils of social assistance have been organized in a number of places, which are so necessary for the previously helpless in this respect, the Mariika.Of course, this small booklet cannot exhaust all forms of work and all its achievements. But even this fragmentary and incomplete information can be used to judge the radical upheaval that is taking place before our eyes in the life of a Mari woman, from a downtrodden and ignorant woman becoming a fighter in the public arena, accustomed to working and gaining equal rights. the women among whom the work is carried out belong to the poor and middle peasants of the village, and thus, the woman is drawn into the class struggle, helping the poor elements of the Mari village. The congress of Mari women, held in March 1926, summed up the work done over the years of the revolution to emancipate the Mari, and noting its negative and positive points about which were mentioned in this book, recognized it as quite satisfactory, and approved the general line of work. Of course, there is still a lot of work ahead, but its basic foundation has been laid quite firmly and it is to be hoped that in the future the work will continue at an ever faster pace, gaining sympathy and support from the working Mari woman herself. show the successes and achievements mentioned here.