1. General outline of the region and people
Votskaya Autonomous Region was formed from Glazovsky, Malmyzhsky, Sarapulsky and Yelabuzhsky districts of Vyatka province in 1921. According to the 1927 census, the population of the Votsk region is 755.669 people, on the territory of 20.430 sq. versts According to information from 1924, the population by nationality was distributed as follows: Votyaks — 481.399 people, 65 ° / 0; Russians - 244.402 people, 33%; Tatars — 12,000 people, 1.7%, and others — 2,813 people, 0.3% (total 740,614 people) The real name of the Ud-Murty Votyaks (that is, a person from the people or tribe of Ud. Cheremisy Zovug Votyaks — odo; the Russians used to call them — Otyaks, then it turned into “Votyaks.”) Votyaks from all the peoples of the Finnish tribe were pushed further north by the Russian colonization. The harsh nature of the region, which did not provide enough means for food, had an impact on their appearance. Alternately exploited by the Tatars and Russians, they rapidly dwindled in number and further and further closed themselves into their inhospitable, force-imposed region. They did not give up their places without a struggle, which was especially fierce in the 16th century, after the conquest of Kazan. And subsequently, the Votyaks, driven out of themselves both by the general policy of the tsarist government and by local abuses and oppression, rebelled several times. They especially 'hated the priests, who pursued a policy of Russification and Christianization, accompanied by a number of violence. It was with them that they dealt with first of all during the Pugachevism, and then asked Pugachev for permission to remain in paganism. At the beginning of the 19th century, unrest occurred again among the Votyaks, this time caused by their forcible attachment to work in factories. But they had no organizational center, no leaders; therefore, up to the beginning of the 20th century, their entire national movement has the character of spontaneous outbreaks. By the time of 1905, the Votyaks already had their own intelligentsia, and the latter, especially the people's teachers, sensitively listened to the people's demands, formalized them and took an active part in the revolutionary movements. One of such movements — the Votyak movement, known under the name of the Novo-Multan case — constitutes a glorious page in the history of the Votyak people. It was attended by professional revolutionaries — Comrade Iosifov (Nogovitsyn) and MP Prokopiev (an old Bolshevik). A number of folk teachers were the leaders of the movement. The tsarist government, with the hands of the gendarmerie, brutally dealt with the insurgents: the leaders of the movement were exiled to distant outskirts, comrade Iosifov (Nogovitsyn), to exile in Siberia. To what extent this case stood out from others like him and became widely known, it is clear from the fact that Nikolai I himself, at the reception of the chairmen of the zemstvo councils, asked the chairman of the Vyatka council: “What kind of Novo-Multan territory is this?” Multan uprising. There was also the Old Multan case (90 years of the XIX century), when the tsarist government, not content with the fact that it had already instilled in the society the idea of ​​the Votyaks as savages, still wanted to present them as almost cannibals, bringing human sacrifices ; but, in spite of all the tricks, this accusation could not be proved. After the February Revolution, at first, bourgeois-compromising elements became predominant. At the congress of small peoples of the Volga region, the Votyak representatives took a right-wing position in relation to other congress groups. However, soon the Votyak poor and the revolutionary intelligentsia unite around the slogans of the October Revolution. Communist cells are created, congresses are convened, etc. The Votyak poor are organized to fight the counter-revolution in special detachments. The October Revolution brought emancipation to the Votiaks, but has not yet brought an end to all their troubles. The region suffered greatly during the offensive of Kolchak, as well as during the uprising of petty-bourgeois and kulak elements, led by the city of Izhevsk, against the Soviet regime. In some areas, up to 60% of Votyak villages were burned during the struggle. All this ended in famine, which led to a mass of deaths, a reduction in crops and a pestilence of livestock. Only after that was it possible to begin peaceful construction. With the national subjem that embraces the Votyaks, especially the Votyak intelligentsia, work is progressing rapidly. We will say more about its results, now let us get acquainted with the life and occupations of the Votyaks. The Votyaks are exclusively peasants, although in the Vot-region there is one largest plant — Izhevsk, and two more for & ode; however, there are almost no Votiaks among them. The Votyaks did not like to work in factories, since in the old days there was a mandatory assignment of them to factories for work, which was one of the reasons for their indignation. Only after the October Revolution it became possible for the Votyak to be a worker on a par with the Russians and to take an active part in the structure of production. Now, of course, there are still a few workers-votyaks, but before there were none at all. The votyaks are dirty, dark and damp. Instead of benches, bunks are arranged around the walls in the hut, on which they sleep side by side. They also pay little attention to their clothes, which are poor and unkempt. Such untidiness creates fertile ground for the spread of various diseases. Men dress almost the same as Russians; for women, the outfit is more beautiful and original: a sundress along the hem and sleeves is trimmed with a red ribbon, the apron is also embroidered all over with multi-colored patterns. Around the neck is a monisto of silver coins, which usually constitutes the heirloom value of the Votyaks and is carefully preserved. It is sold only when absolutely necessary (hunger, etc.). On their heads, the Votyachki wear a headdress called "aishon", which resembles a Russian kokoshnik, only it is taller than it and is hung with silver coins and silk ribbons. However, this is now falling out of use, and the Votyaks borrow their dress from the Russians. The main occupation of the Votyaks is agriculture. Once they were exclusively engaged in hunting, which now plays a significant role. Although the Votyak has more land than its neighbors, Russians and Tatars, this land is not very fertile, and the economy is conducted in the most primitive way. Three-field and partly striped, the use of sabans, wooden harrows and other primitive tools does not provide an opportunity to work the land well. Votyak is not yet accustomed to innovations, he must look out, think, wait, and therefore agricultural implements, more modern, do not penetrate much into the Votyak village, although a great shift has taken place in this direction recently. In the years after the famine, the main focus was on rebuilding agriculture. It can be considered that this recovery period was completed in 1925. The sown area reached 98.5%, in relation to 1916 (658,200 dessiatines) and the gross harvest was 95%. For some crops, the harvest exceeded the average pre-war yield, reaching 44 poods per tithe for rye (instead of 43 pre-war), 47 poods for oats (instead of 46 pre-war) and 58 poods of barley (instead of 52 pre-war). The number of draft animals is also approaching the pre-war level. Growing little by little and agricultural. inventory. These are the first steps towards further improvement of the economy. The distribution of land and draft animals is not very variegated, which shows that the class stratification is not very strong in the Votyak village. It should be noted that the Votyak was thrifty, despite the low harvests; - it was said earlier that he was only then he feels calm when he has a supply of bread for 2 years. Votyak's support activities are beekeeping and hunting. Beekeeping is quite well developed, and Votyak, with his persistence and skill, is a born beekeeper. He treats this very carefully and, despite the fact that he uses primitive: hives, he knows how to remove good harvests of honey. As for hunting, here too he uses the funds he inherited from his fathers. Weapons are used little. But no one better than a Votyak can make a trap, a snare for an animal or a bird. Having preserved these old tools, he does not try to replace them with new, more convenient ones. We have already said that the Votyaks work little in factories, where they were forcibly driven by the tsarist government. In exactly the same way, they are not engaged in side trades. Farmwork and carriage are their occupation at a time when they are free from field work. Handicrafts are underdeveloped. Votyaki makes only baskets, beetroots and bast shoes, mostly for their own consumption or for a small area. It must be said, however. that Votyak is said to be a jack of all trades. Maybe this is due to the fact that he does not always have the opportunity to buy this or that thing. He is often himself a blacksmith and carpenter, joiner and tailor. Spoons, cups, tables, skis — he does it all himself. He himself makes himself a hat of sheep's wool, makes cloth from which he sews a zipun, makes harness for a horse from bast shoes, weaves bast shoes, makes a plow and a harrow. In this respect, there is a division of labor between a man and a woman, who in the votyak family is not only a housewife, but also performs the role of a doctor and a number of other duties. At present, the Votyaks have become more attentive to gardening. The reason for this is the famine in 1921/22. The vegetable garden lies entirely in the care of the woman. Backward methods of cultivating the land, moreover inconvenient and requiring a lot of care, create a strong, great need for working hands. Each piece of land requires careful and long work. Therefore, not only a woman, but also children, at an early age, are involved in field and household work. The family values ​​every worker: they try to keep the girl longer until she gets married. In turn, the groom's family wants, by marrying a young boy of 16-17 years old, to get an already fully developed female worker, 25 years old. This explains the inequality of marriageable ages. Votyaks are not averse to giving their children an education, but the need for working hands makes them take their children from school early, and often do not teach at all for fear that the child will not learn to work. After giving the child 7-9 years old to study, the Votyak takes him at the age of 10-11 years, saying that “a worker is needed” (“I am horrified by the kule”). Therefore, among the Votiaks there was the highest percentage of illiterate women — up to 9O%. In here At schools in the 1st group there are often up to 100 people, in the latter there are no more than 5-6 people. Votyak's food is monotonous and already scarce. Difficult living conditions give special value to food in general, and especially to bread. Scattering bread or leaving crumbs on the table is not good, as this can anger the spirit and patron of food. Therefore, the crumbs are taken to the field and scattered there. (Belief in the great role of bread makes the Votyaks consider it some kind of miraculous object. When going on a long journey, the Votyak always takes “bread with him, and only feeling a piece of it in his bosom, he is calm, because bread, this priceless substance, from which the life of every living creature depends on, he: will be able to appease any spirit. Faith in these spirits and gods survived in the Votyaks, despite the fact that about 200 years ago, they were forced to convert to Christianity. The usual drinks of Votyak are kvass and homemade beer The most common alcoholic drink is "little bit" made from malt, rye and oat flour. This is an intoxicating and strong drink that has a harmful effect on the body. But the Votyaks are so used to it that they consider it the best drink in the world and prefer any other. In order to expel the "kumyshka" from the VOTYATSKY village, a struggle with educational measures is needed. Exactly the same struggle is needed against superstition and witchcraft, which still live in the Votyatsky village vnyah. When someone falls ill, the Votyaks do not change the sick linen, because, according to their beliefs, the spirit of the illness can get angry from changing and washing the linen, and then the sick man will get worse. Thus, the patient is left to himself and the "spirit of the disease." How Votyaks imagine diseases can be inferred from the following interesting story, which is very characteristic of the entire Votyak life, the keepers of which are women: “The Votyak went into the forest for firewood and, having chopped wood, sat down to rest. Suddenly he hears: steps are approaching him, and several people are consulting about something. Votyak got up and saw: two hefty people are going somewhere past him. Votyak quickly hid behind a tree and began to listen to what they were saying. One says: "I am going to such and such a village and I will shiver such and such a person," and at the same time calls the name of the same Votyak who hid under a tree and overheard them. “When he starts to eat soup, he never says: Osto Kozma! (God bless!). Together with the soup, I enter it and do my job. ”“ Hey, ”thought the votyak,“ because these are fevers, and one of them intends to visit me. No, you are naughty, I will teach you a lesson this time, fever, and I will teach you a lesson so that you will never look at me again. " Having said this, the Votyak went home. He came, and the stew, as if on purpose, was already on the table. Votyak, before sitting down at the table, took his leather bag, then sat down at the table and, without saying anything, poured three spoons of soup into it. Then he tied the bag tightly and hung it on the wall, and sat down at the table and said: “Osto Kozma and began to eat. After a while, the pouch began to shake, like a person during a chill. And he was shaking because he was in a fever. Thinking of getting into the mouth of a man with the soup, which the Votyak poured into the bag, she got into this last one, but when she got there, she couldn't get out, because the bag was tightly tied. Votyak, as soon as the bag began to shake, threw it into a hot oven to fry the fever. Then he took it out and hung it on the wall again and did it for a week. Finally, the fever could not stand it and begged the Votyak: "Let me go, please!", And the Votyak says: "I will let go if you never bother me again." The fever says: "No, I won't, just let it go." Votyak untied his bag. There was a strong cracking sound, similar to the one we hear when we remove the cork from a beer bottle — the fever flew out of the bag. The next day the Votyak went to his former place to get some wood and again hears: steps and voices approaching him. Votyak got up and saw: “They are not going out of the forest, as before, but into the forest, two people. “These are the very fevers,” he said to himself, “which I recently heard here, under a tree. But why is one of them so thick and plump, and the other thin and dry as a stick? Before, they seemed to be the same in their fullness. ”-“ Well, I was amused, ”says a thick fever, a thin one:“ for a whole week I ruffled him, and he shook like an aspen leaf. I sucked all the fat out of it, and that's why I myself became plump. ”“ And I almost died, ”the thin fever said plaintively:“ the damned man brought a leather bag to his mouth and began to eat. I was about to sit down on a spoon and, along with the soup, went to my mouth, but the man knocked over his spoon and poured the whole soup into the bag; I fell in for the stew, and the man, meanwhile, tied a bag and hung it on the wall. I, as usual, caused, there was a strong chill, but the person, noticing that the bag was shaking, threw it, and, of course, me with it, into the hot oven. Then he took it out, hung it on the wall again, then threw it into the oven again, took it out of the oven again, hung it on the wall. and thus tortured me for a whole week. Finally, I could not bear such torture and shouted: "Man, let me go, please!" And he says: "Give me your word that you will never bother me again." I gave, then he let go. ”Priests, sorcerers and professional sorcerers,“ abyz ”, played the main role in the village of Votyats before the revolution. "Abyz" was revered much more than a doctor, since he, unlike the latter, knew the Votyak language and all the customs of the Votyak village. Only recently, thanks to a number of shifts, as a result of the revolution, "abyz" is gradually losing its position, and the population is increasingly turning not to him, but to doctors. Women also played an important role in this regard, which we will discuss later, and, in particular, the Votyak youth, which is the most revolutionary stratum in the countryside. The Votyaks still retain traces of family life, and only recently has its rapid decay been taking place. This was manifested in the communal structure, in the skills for collectivism. The village assembly, "ke-nesh", had supreme power in the village, right up to the disposal of the life of any fellow villager. All matters were decided by this meeting and various offenses were tried. Theft was severely punished by the Votyaks. And it almost never happened. Until now, old people remember the time when the barns were not locked and did not know the use of locks. Likewise, these collective skills persisted in relationships. Votyak is a good family man, and usually the family lives together. He also tries to live peacefully and well with his neighbors. “You cannot live without neighbors, without community,” says the Votyak proverb. With them, he, like in the family, considers it necessary to consult on various occasions. That is why Votyaks love to live in large families; if the family grows and it becomes crowded in one hut, then they build another, and although they live in two huts, the property remains common. It used to be common that entire villages were united into a community for cultivating the land, hunting, etc. They take part in various kinds of work together and evenly divide the extracted. But in recent years, before the revolution, such cases became more rare, and with the emergence of such associations, the desire of the richer, stronger elements to exploit the weak was revealed: - the poor. The unfolding class struggle in the Votyak village destroyed almost all the remnants of the old way of life. The Enlightenment did not develop before the revolution, and due to ignorance, the poor and unsanitary conditions, infectious diseases, especially venereal diseases, became widespread. Quite a large, primitive, licentiousness, gatherings and other customs also contributed to this. Given the deep intrusion of these customs and prejudices into the life of the Votyaks, the fight against them is extremely difficult. It could begin only after the elimination of all the calamities that befell the Votsk region at the beginning of the revolution: Kolchak, civil war and famine. At first, the main attention of the Soviet government was focused on eliminating the consequences of these disasters, and only now, when the economy of the Votyak village is rapidly moving along the path of its restoration, can more attention be paid to cultural work. Great perseverance is needed in order to conduct work in a planned manner, great skill is needed to approach the Votyak, who is accustomed to everything. We have already said that in this respect the youth organizations are of great importance, on whose shoulders all the work of educating the Votyak village falls. The very fact of attracting these young people to Komsomol organizations, cultural enlightenment circles and others, separating them from the traditional pastime at get-togethers that take evenings and nights from autumn to spring is an extremely significant achievement. But these young people were able not only to organize themselves, but they managed to win recognition from the Votyak peasantry, who at first had a very negative attitude to such undertakings. The idea of ​​Komsomol cells as a necessary and useful school for young people is penetrating deeper and deeper into the minds of the Votyaks. Now it is not uncommon to hear how happy Votyach-mothers are when their son or daughter gets into the Komsomol. It is said that one vot, who three years ago was fanatical against the communists, later prayed and thanked God for helping her daughter get into the Komsomol. Leading people appear in the village, and already to them, and not to sorcerers, the peasants go for advice. The unfolding class struggle finds the poor peasants of the Votyak village more often than not already organized, and they are victorious. An important role in this is played by the Red Army, bringing to their native villages a lot of new things that the Votyaks have been expecting for so long. School building 'is developing. Already in 1923, there were 329 I stage schools, 23 II stage schools, 72 orphanages and 19 kindergartens in the region. By 1926, the number of grade I schools had already increased to 452. Since the region has few funds for a wide organization of work, the center is constantly providing additional funds. In the Votsk region. two newspapers are published in the Votyak language. During the years of the revolution, about 100 books were published and brochures in the Votyak language, providing the Votyak peasant with much-needed information on agriculture, social issues, health protection, etc. Books in the Votyak language were published before the revolution, but these were, in the overwhelming majority, different lives of sowing, etc. It can be considered that the preliminary work on the education of the Votyak village is already coming to an end, and in the near future it will proceed at an even deeper and broader pace. Possessing natural resources (coal, iron and copper ores, mineral springs and mud, forests, game, etc.) and inhabited by stubborn grain growers who love their work, the Votskaya region has every reason for the further and rapid development of its economy. This, in turn, will make it possible to finally get rid of all those negative traits that we talked about. In this respect, the presence of such large factories as Izhevsk and others in Votobrazne is very important. The presence of an organized proletariat among the entirely peasant population has a beneficial effect on changing the old way of life of the peasantry and other aspects of its life.

2. Pre-revolutionary life of a Votyachka
Unlike the women of neighboring nationalities, the Votyachka enjoyed great freedom even before the revolution in some relations. The remnants of that stage of development when a woman occupies a dominant position in society (matriarchy) is here. But, along with this, there is a lot of negative in her life, and even the most partial freedom is most often used not in a good way. The position of a girl is more free than that of a married woman. In terms of work, the votyachka does not lag behind the man: she mows, manages a harrow, a plow, etc. In the field, she works on a par with him. At home, she has more to do than him. The whole household is in her hands. The man almost does not interfere in her area here. In the hands of the votyachka, money is kept for various household purchases, and she is, as it were, the treasurer of the family. The husband rarely does anything without first consulting his wife. “The whole house is courted by a woman,” says the Votyak, and tries to live peacefully with his wife. He almost never hits her, because, in his own words, "you beat your wife - you beat yourself." Under such conditions, the woman actually plays the role of head of the house. She is also a family doctor. However, in spite of this freedom, the majority of the Votyachki continue to remain ignorant, and until 9O <Yo they are illiterate. This percentage — higher than the percentage of illiteracy among Russian women in the region — speaks for their undoubted backwardness. A woman, according to a man, has no time to learn. If we trace the life of a votyachka from childhood, we will understand this view. Already from the age of 7, the girl begins to be valued as a working unit in the household: she helps her mother in her numerous work around the house, garden, etc. As a result, most often the girl-witch is left without any education and gets used to her whole little! leisure to give to parties and gatherings. The father, who is strict and demanding of her with regard to work and marriage at his discretion, gives her complete freedom while she is in girls. She can leave and return from the party at any time of the night — in the summer it is all the more convenient for her because she lives in her “to-e-nose” (barn) — completely independently from the rest of the family. Starting from 12-14 years old, girls spend all their free time walking around gatherings, which continue from early Autumn to spring, and in summer, at parties and round dances. Sometimes a hut is rented for gatherings for the whole season. Guys also come to the gatherings. There, they first play and hang out, and then, about 12 hours, put out the fire and go to bed side by side. These gatherings are often centers of sexual promiscuity and entail a wide spread of syphilis and other diseases. But despite these harmful consequences, the gatherings are firmly rooted in everyday life. If a girl does not walk on them, they laugh at her, do not give a pass, even deny the right to marriage. Votyachka-girl early begins to live a sex life, and premarital sexual intercourse is not considered reprehensible. On the contrary, the more guys a girl has, the higher she is valued and the more suitors she has. True, recently it has become in some places considered shameful to have a child before marriage. But earlier, and even now in many localities, it was considered, on the contrary, a good sign, and the birth of a girl's child was met with joy in the family — such a girl began to be appreciated more. Such customs, which were quite natural in the old days, now, with changes in living conditions, lead to the most undesirable consequences: sexual promiscuity, etc. Thus, the fact that a woman used to enjoy considerable freedom among the Votyaks did not change. ... 1. Women's holiday in the vot village. She was in the best position, and in her ignorance she did not lag behind the oppressed and enslaved women of other nationalities. The Votyak girl with her own hands helps to spread the negative feelings of the Votyak village, since, for example, it is her responsibility to cook "kumyshka". Young people are no less addicted to this drink, and when a girl needs to treat her friends, she starts cooking kumyshka. It is not forbidden for her to do household chores, and she enjoys complete freedom in "alcohol affairs". Along with the guys, she takes part in various games and amusements (horse races, festivities with rituals, etc.). To participate in these festivities, a girl can take a horse, etc., and the elders do not take offense at this. But now comes the end of this free girlhood, during which many girls are crippled physically and morally, 'where it is difficult, in sexual relations, for example, to draw the line between the voluntary and the imposed. A married woman remembers her girlhood, appreciates it most of all for festivities, this especially stays in her memory the proverb: "Odig hole shulan holes", 'that is, “Once in my life there is only a period of partying” —is used by votyachki when they remember their youth. We have already said that it is customary among the Votyaks to give their daughters in adulthood (25 years old), and to marry their sons young (16-17 years old). When they decide to marry a son, they come to the bride's house or give birth they ate and said: “Now we are old people, we have a big farm, our son is still young, there is no one to rely on. There are no employees. Would you give the girl if she were our mistress. " The remnants of the old Votyak wedding customs survived only as an accidental element. These include traces of purchase and theft. The purchase is remembered in the votyatsky song: 1 “It would be good 'this time, When we go to the bazaar,' Silk fabrics were selling cheaply. It would be good 'in those years, When we begin to marry, Girls became cheap.' Now, although the father has the power to force the girl into marriage, he rarely exercises this right. Previously, the girl is asked about her consent, after which they play a wedding. Even if abductions exist, it is only with the consent of the bride, otherwise the latter still leaves the groom. In the case of caring for her, as a rule, they are not chased and not particularly condemned, although divorce is condemned. If the father does not agree to marry off his daughter for a person she likes, then she herself goes to him, taking away all her property in addition. The fact is that, although according to Votyak customs, a woman does not at all have the right to the property of the entire household, but a part of the products made by her — wool, canvas, etc. — are considered at her disposal. Likewise, livestock in most cases is considered a woman's property. Each girl receives livestock from her parents or relatives as a dowry (foals, calves, etc.), which she brings to the groom's house, and then passes on to her children or relatives. The destruction and sale of these livestock is condemned by the Votiaks and is allowed only in the most extreme cases. These are again echoes of the time when a woman was the head of the family, and the entire household was considered her property. The property of a Votach woman creates to a large extent her legal status in the family. If she has more livestock, then she gets more food and is more respected. If she has little of it, then, accordingly, the share of milk, butter, meat, eggs, etc. given to her is reduced accordingly. Having women usually exploit the poor. It must be said that in a large Votyak family there is a queue to cook in the kitchen. The advantages of having more livestock are that they get more days of duty - two days in a row, and the poor must be content with one day. Since every woman derives significant benefit from this, consuming part of the products for treating relatives and treating her children, the benefits of such a double watch become clear. It even happens that a woman is completely deprived of this privilege, and in this case, she must be content with handouts from her elders. Young women — daughters-in-law who have little property most often find themselves in this situation. This circumstance often serves as a source of quarrels and sometimes even leads to divisions. But let us return to the girl-witch. So, she gets married, and this ends her free youth, so often remembered by her. As soon as she enters her husband's house, she must leave her former licentiousness and become a faithful wife, otherwise the custom, which looked so favorably upon her girlhood, would severely condemn her. Even at the surviving “women's holidays”, which speak for the fact that once a woman enjoyed no less freedom than a girl in sex life, her husband vigilantly looks after her. On these festivals, which take place in the early days of Lent, women gather and revel alone or together with men. Obviously, earlier on these holidays a woman was given the freedom to choose the man she liked. Even at the present time, sometimes there are connections with other people's men on these holidays, but the husband, if he is not completely drunk, watches over his wife and tries to prevent this. The work life of a votyachka contains many responsibilities. We have already said that in the field she works on an equal basis with a man. In addition to caring for livestock and a vegetable garden, she is responsible for preparing clothes for her household and some close relatives. All the work, from breaking flax to sewing clothes from canvas, lies with her. Washing clothes is also a woman's responsibility. Despite the poverty, the votyachka knows how to cook everything that is needed, and even somehow she always has various supplies, scraps, etc., which she carefully collects and stores. But the diligence of the Votyachka woman does not rid her of dirt and uncleanliness. For example, she does not wash linen with soap, but simply pounds it in a mortar. The same dirt continues to remain in the votyak hut. Thus, by the nature and size of its work, the votyachka, naturally, was always attached to the hut; she did not participate in village meetings. Among the male Votyaks, it was generally accepted that a woman was not suitable for participation in public work and, therefore, could not claim it. Since her position in the family made her a family doctor, she had to know all sorts of beliefs and remedies to help with this or that disease. Due to this, she often had to turn to village sorcerers and "abyz". This taught her to believe only the latter, converting to ask them for help, which, of course, aggravated her ignorance. If a Votyak man is gullible and superstitious — he is afraid of evil spirits and tries to maintain good relations with good ones — then the Votyachka in this respect was even darker. That is why she did not understand that there was a benefit if she gave up teaching her children, and preferred to keep them at home. With an undoubtedly good position in the family, a votyachka has no right to divorce. This right remains entirely with the man, who can separate from his wife at will. In the Votyak language, this is still called: "expulsion of the wife" ("kyshno ulyan"). In the event of such exile, she cannot even claim a share of the common 'property or complain about her husband. In the old days, divorce was carried out by the village assembly, but a woman rarely had the courage to raise such issues. She also did not know how to apply for protection in court. The Votyaks are accustomed to value their custom more than court. But at the same time, the Votyaks are extremely caring, for example, towards a pregnant woman. They release her two weeks before giving birth from heavy field and housework. During childbirth and for some time afterwards, she enjoys the care and care of her family and even neighbors. But this does not save her from having to give birth in a dirty room with the help of an ignorant village midwife, whom she used to trust more than a midwife. All other diseases are treated at home. Illness is sent by an evil spirit, and in order to be cured, you need to get rid of it. To get an idea of ​​the methods of treatment, we will give a means of curing a child from the so-called "dog old age" ("pune kyl"). In the process of illness, the child greatly loses weight, his body becomes dark, his arms and legs cease to function. Such a child is thrown in the place where the dog was lying, then, together with the shaky, they are placed in a hot oven, after the bread has been taken out of it, the dog is forced to jump over the sick child: if the sick child is male, the male dog jumps, and if girl, - the female jumps. Then they put the child in a dog kennel for a few minutes. If a child develops fungi, that is, abscesses on the tongue, due to the unclean 'content of the oral cavity, then he is treated' by taking fungi growing on the walls of the cellar, rinsing them in water and giving the child this water; sometimes they also put a cat's tail in his mouth. Under such conditions, it is difficult to expect the normal development of the child. Votyaks respect their ancestors very much and try to escort the deceased to the next world as best as possible. Women take an active part in the performance of such superstitious customs. In some places, for example, there is a custom at the funeral of an infant, before lowering it into the ground, to breastfeed the dead infant for the last time — squeezing milk from the breast into his mouth three times. If the votyachka for some reason cannot take the child to the cemetery, then she performs this rite at home, during parting. In the same way, the next day after the commemoration, after the so-called "hangover dinner" ("makmyr shyt") - in order to please their ancestors, women and old women dress up as during Christmas time, and ride through the streets on sticks to the upper at the ends of which bells are tied, they laugh like a horse, and if they see any stranger on the street, they grab him and, leaving their sticks, forcibly begin to ride him until he can fight them off. A young woman who is married must 'appease her ancestors. For this, there are special commemorations called "yyrpyd eeton" ("giving up the head and legs"). They are performed by young women in the first or second year of their marriage. For this purpose, a horse or a bull is usually slaughtered in the husband's house, the head and legs of which are taken by the wives with their husbands to the house from which they married. Here they bake pancakes on the first day, and in the evening the next day the Varangians brought them, which is eaten by the invited relatives and neighbors. These commemorations are distinguished by the fact that those present at them sing wedding songs. Then they harness several sledges with bells (commemoration takes place in winter); bones from the sedenny are put into a basket and late in the evening with wedding songs, they are taken to the field. These commemorations are arranged so that the deceased relatives do not get angry and do not take revenge on the newlyweds for not inviting them to the wedding, as well as in gratitude for their patronage. All of the above allows you to form a whole idea of ​​the situation of a Votyak woman from separate pieces of everyday life. Despite a number of advantages that she enjoys, her life cannot be called easy. Maybe that's why she drinks kumyshka on a par with a man and, moreover, does not even get drunk. By doing as much as a man, if not more, she is just as strong and her habits are in many ways similar to those of men. She is only more ignorant, prejudices and superstitions are more ingrained in her. She is not used to complaining about her life and not everyone agrees to tell her. Only in pesias does she, like a male Votyak, lay out all her thoughts, her hard, working life. She sings: We don't sing, we don't tell do not come a heavy grief; We do not complain, we do not cry, Until there is a great disappointment. When sorrow and suffering come, Then we sing, shedding tears ... Shedding tears is what else! —Then (we) sing, telling everything that lies on the heart. Votyachka did not know funny songs; after continuous work, only bitter songs escaped her: 1Ah, mother, mother, I have a lot of grief — Why did she give birth to me in suffering? Ah, mother, mother, my voice is very beautiful— Why didn't she teach me to sing? All these conditions, not seeing any way out, a votyachka in girlhood sometimes uses her freedom so incontinently — after all, there is a whole life ahead without the slightest glimmer of this freedom. After all, no one told her that it was possible to live differently and that she had the right to do so. And while at work, embroidering "aishon" or making yarn, she sings her song. The work of the Votyaks is unique and multifaceted, and the woman takes a great part in this work. She sings about everything that meets her in life, that deeply touches her. Votyaks are generally inexhaustible in the choice of themes for their songs. It is not for nothing that the Russians put down a proverb about them: "Votyak sings everything: walking in the forest — he sings about the forest, walking in the field — about the p-bet field”. “They give a girl in marriage, and she composes her songs for her friends. The last time her friends gather to her in a close circle, and the girl for the last time says and sings everything that she needs to convey or say. " In her songs, the votyachka shows herself to us as an impressionable, talented, capable of wonderful creativity. But the whole environment of the old way of life that we have outlined forced her not to develop these abilities, but, on the contrary, to drown them. And a lot still needs to be done to destroy all these negative features of her life and give vent to all the abilities inherent in the votyachka.

3. Work among the votyachki during the years of the revolution. Construction of a new way of life
After a series of disasters, the Votyak village is recovering quickly; in it, along with general work, there is work among women. She is very difficult, but also very grateful. Until recently, the eye had a preparatory character, because, before deploying it systematically, it was necessary to create sufficiently justified methods of work, to create a correct approach to the peasant woman. From among the latter, it was necessary to create ranks of women workers, it was necessary to gradually involve women in social construction, and then to carry out a wide educational work. In order to more clearly imagine the work done among women-warriors during the years of the revolution, and the changes taking place in this regard, in the everyday life, we will tell you successively about its participation in all manifestations of social life. The involvement of women votyachka in party work is a difficult task already because the votyachka is little accustomed to organization and discipline. That is why there are still so few votes in party organizations — about 10%, all women are party members, and no more than 2o / o of the total number of members. This is also explained by the fact that a married woman often does not consider it possible to carry out party work, due to her occupation with housework. In this respect, girls are more free. That is why the Komsomol in the Votyak village is the most positive moment in terms of involving women. Gradually the votyachka gets used to it - here it is to party work, and the population itself, as we have already said, willingly opposes the Komsomol organizations to traditional gatherings. Votyachka is not limited, however, to ordinary participation in these organizations, but is gradually getting used to more responsible work. So, we see votyachkas in the district women's departments and in other governing bodies. The central core of work among the votyachi is, of course, the delegate corps. The very growth of the delegate corps speaks for the rapid pace at which the votyachki are being drawn into social construction, just as the consciousness of the peasants of the votyak village is growing. In the beginning, this village was very negative about women's participation in social work. The first fighters for the conquest of the rights of the Votyachki, for changing the old family traditions were, in most cases, Red Army women, widows and poor elements. But this involved only a part of the women; the bulk, middle peasants, did not take part in it at first. They were distrustful of such news and, shaking their heads, said: "The soldiers have nothing to do, let them talk, but we have no time: we have a husband and a household." Thus, the composition of the delegate meeting of the Votsk region for some time could not yet cover all strata of the population. But the work on attracting middle peasants to the number of delegates, on promoting them to public work, more than a year ago was recognized as another, and at present the composition of the delegate corps is moving along the path of including representatives of all groups of the working Votyachka. Now half of all delegates are Votyachki, and most of them are poor, widows and Red Army women. Every 50 adult female peasant women have their own delegate, who, as far as she can, tries to gain knowledge in order to work in her cell. Until now, the work on the mass promotion of votachek-del Gatok could not develop widely enough. Elimination of illiteracy among delegates lies in most cases on the responsibility of teachers. It should be noted that, despite their workload, they do everything in their power here. When, in July 1926, courses for retraining women organizers were created, it turned out that they would have to talk with them not only about methods of working among women, but also teach them the simplest things first. However, thanks to the exceptional work, the training was successful ', and after its completion most of them were used at work as volga-organizers and in mass work. Compared with the same rates of 1925, which turned out to be even weaker, there was a significant improvement. At the beginning, work among female votyachki was not quite the right path. As a result of the national uplift, which at the beginning of the revolution covered all national minorities, there was a desire to develop work on the widest possible scale. In the department of working women and peasant women, this desire was expressed in the desire to cover every village, every corner. But there were not enough workers, and the women's department often resorted to transferring them from point to point, so as not to completely abandon such a wide coverage. This was, of course, abnormal, and the slogan of quality is now strongly opposed to quantity. Improving grassroots political education cells and bringing them closer to the needs of women-votists, in turn, should create local centers. 'Such institutions in the village are, first of all, reading rooms, district clubs, etc. That votyachki are drawn to these cultural and educational centers is evident from the fact that the average attendance of one reading room in the Votom region is 60% to the lot of the Votyaks. Of this number, still a small part are women, noris. 2. Pioneers this is mostly due to the fact that the reading rooms still have a very weak connection with them. We need to organize women's corners, highlight special issues that are especially interesting for women, or even one day dedicated exclusively to working with women. That the votyachka herself is interested in cultural and educational work and is ready to respond to it, say, for example, the following facts: that the attendance of regional clubs in Votskaya oblast is three-quarters of a woman, or that special women's wall newspapers are organized in a number of places. Wall newspapers are a fact that cannot be ignored. It is no secret to anyone that although more literature was published in the Votyak language during the years of the revolution than in all the time before the revolution, it is still a rarity in the Votyak village; there is almost no literature on the women's question. After the activities of the departments of working women and peasant women, it cannot confine itself to a purely women's issue and must seize that area that needs an early conquest. We want to talk about the upbringing of young people, in particular girls, about the fight against traditional "gatherings", sexual promiscuity, etc. The work to destroy these deeply rooted customs, so destructive to the health of young people and the life of the entire village, is a priority. Votyachki are so accustomed to spending their youth in such conditions that it is impossible to snatch them out of them by only one campaign or other events, without replacing the "gatherings" with something else. The reading room cannot yet replace them. You need something that connects, entertainment with useful. The experience of several years of work has convinced of the need for just such a path; The work on getting rid of the “gatherings” goes in two ways: “theoretical” and “practical”. The first part consists of purely propaganda work, which consists in clarifying the harmful consequences of traditional "get-togethers" and other similar customs. The second part — practical — consists in organizing "red gatherings", schools of cutting and sewing, arranging question and answer evenings, performances, etc. for girls. In this regard, most of the work lies with the lower-level Komsomol organizations, which have already shown themselves enough in the fight against gatherings. ' For the organization of schools of cutting and sewing, funds and premises are required, unfortunately, not always available. Therefore, this work is not developing as quickly as we would like. Work on the protection of mothers and infants, on hygiene and sanitation is carried out by district doctors through lectures and discussions. They cannot, of course, give her a lot of time, given the workload that is the constant companion of health workers in the village. Work can only give results when it is uninterrupted and persistent. Such work should be carried out by commissions for the protection of mothers and infants, recently organized at the executive committees. Already in the summer of 1926, these commissions took part in the nursery campaign. In the same way, work is being done on the ground to organize the "mother and child" corners. To snatch a child from the very first days from the oppressive environment that cripples his body is the task of these undertakings. It is necessary to force the votyach-mother to think about these questions and to do everything possible to change the conditions in which the child grew up and continues to grow. We have already seen how a child is treated with native medicine. But at present, the votyachka is beginning to understand the usefulness of work on the protection of mothers and infants and she herself takes an active part in it. The general attitude of the female masses to this work is benevolent, and its growth occurs, albeit gradually, but organically and with the active support of the women themselves. The appeal of women to village women and healers and the treatment of all kinds of diseases at home occurs not only due to the general superstition, but also due to the fact that before, except for midwives and healers, there was no one in the village. During childbirth, no one could help the votyachka. There were few hospitals, and midwives did not show up in the village. Only after the revolution a series of improvements began, expressed in the continuous expansion of the network of health care institutions serving the countryside. Already in 1925, the first graduation of sisters of mercy from a two-year school was produced in Izhevsk. “The composition of its listeners is 20% of Votyak nationality. But this is not enough. And now the health department comes to the idea of ​​the need to open an obstetric technical school in the fall of 1925, in which the majority of the students should be voted. This puts work on the path of directly serving the needs of the votyak village, through the training of workers from among the votyaks themselves. The matter of health care and the protection of mothers and infancy, like the matter of education, thus becomes the business of the votys themselves. I must also say about the consulting work that is gradually covering the Votyak village. The village needs advice, and it’s difficult to follow them to the provincial or district town where these consultations exist. they operate as special institutions. The allocation of consulting days and hours at medical plots in the countryside meets her here halfway in this need. “The work on the organization of children's institutions, which until now, for the most part, served the urban population, is proceeding more slowly. Lack of funds prevented the deepening of the work. In this regard, the center rendered substantial assistance to Votom region. Not so long ago, the Council of People's Commissars, at the request of the Women's Department of the Central Committee and the local women's department, allocated a huge sum in terms of the budget to organize a children's town in the region — 80,000 rubles. This, undoubtedly, will make it possible in the very near future to include the children of the Votyak village, who need it most of all, in work. The work of education is developing well. Votyachka studies very willingly; there are times when she comes to a health center, or to school with a child in her arms. For the first time, the question of enlightening the Votyak was raised in 1920, at the 1st All-Russian Congress of Votyak Communists. After the revolution, the Votyachka flooded into the school, which was previously almost inaccessible to her, and soon we see Votyachka not only in primary schools, but also in the second stage, even in universities. In terms of the number of Votyaks studying in universities, women often overtake men, as they studied at the time when they were fighting at the front. And at present, the number of Votya girls studying in various educational institutions is increasing all the time, and in comparison with the pre-war period is an unprecedented phenomenon. With regard to education, the Votyak girl is the foremost. She teaches in first-degree schools, studies in communist schools, and at least 40-50 votyachki are currently sent to various higher educational institutions every year. Votyachka quickly masters with participation in public work and not only becomes an active member of village meetings, which was not the case before the revolution, not only elects to bodies of public self-government, but also works in them. The figures of 1926 tell us that at the present time a third of the voters in the Votsk region are women. Involving her in cooperation and agricultural. unification is proceeding just as well. This speaks for the fact that a woman-voted woman knows how, being elected to responsible positions, to justify the trust placed in her and gets used to this new job for her. We see women-narrators, women acting as defenders on domestic and women's issues, etc., etc. It is especially necessary to note the growth of women's activity in the election of councils and the continuous growth of women in the village council and other organizations. All this shows that the departments for work among female workers and peasant women have done significant work and have completed their first campaign period. This work gave good results. She involved the woman in active social construction, in study, in work on the protection of mothers and infants and in a number of party and Soviet organizations. Not only that, agitation has already partly paved the way for the destruction of the basic abnormalities of the Votyak village. This work, of course, could not yet acquire any systematic and planned character. The task of future work is the transition from agitational influence to in-depth educational work, to a greater coordination of the activities of the lower apparatuses with social-party and Soviet work. The fight against the everyday life of the Votyak village puts on the agenda several of the most pressing issues, the solution of which is a matter of today, for example, the elimination of gatherings through practical cultural and educational activities. The progressing economic development of the region provides a basis for further work. The guarantee that the work on the implementation of these measures will be successful is everything that has been done so far. Every worker who has devoted the years of the revolution to hard work among women-votyachki can boldly look at the Path traveled by THEM, for MUCH OF WHAT could be done is done. Genuine involvement of the masses themselves in serious and creative work, taking into account all national and domestic features is a characteristic feature of our national policy. On the example of Votobraz it is especially clear. Let us give figures characterizing the achievements obtained in the work among the votyachki. Delegate corps convocation of 1925/26. The total number of delegates in Votom region is 3.470. Of this number, 2,556 peasant women. By nationality, Russians — 1,160, votyachkas — 1,556, other nationalities — 256, without specifying nationality — 37. Thus, already in 1925-26, votyachki constituted about 50%; the entire delegate corps. By party membership: VKP (b) —48, Komsomol — 137, non-party — 3.285. Courses for the training and retraining of women organizers were held 2 times — in 1925 and 1926. The first ones did not give great results in the use of female students in practical work. Courses in 4926 passed: much more successful. There were 21 people on them (votyachek — 13, Russian — 7, and Tartars — 1). Those who graduated from the courses were distributed as follows: 10 — for work as volzhen organizers, 1 — ra'ayzhen-organizer, 43 — for mass work on a county scale, 3 — for mass work and 2 — for further learning. A woman in partii and Soviet work, cooperation, etc. A woman in village councils: 1921-1922, -1 , 1925 164, 1926 579, in 1925 - 42. Women-voters to the total number of voters in 1925 - 25.3% and in 1926 - 31o / o. There are 175 women in the committees of peasant public mutual assistance. People's assessors in 1925 — 364. 3.212 h. (21.40 / o out of the total number of the cooperated population) and in the agricultural sector. cooperatives — 541, or 7o / o of the total. In elective organizations (cooperative) —25 f. We do not have figures showing the distribution of these women by nationality, but we must assume that votyachki make up a significant percentage of this number. So, for example, in committees of peasant mutual assistance of 175 women, -55 votyachki and in cooperative organizations in elective positions of 25 women-3 votyachki. There are 500 women in the party organization, out of a total of 3,287 members, of which 50 are votyachkas. Education. In the Votom region there are schools of the 1st stage — 452 (in them there are women teachers of votyachkas — 46) and the 2nd stage — 12 9- In the communist schools of the total number of students, 15% are girls (37 people). In 1925, Russian girls were sent to universities 89_, votyachek — '41, and other nationalities — 6 (21% of the total number of people on business trips). Men and women are trained jointly at the training camp for illiterate people. ' Illiteracy — 78% of Russians, Votyachki — up to 90%, and other nationalities — 88%. Izb-reading room - 89. The attendance of the 1st reading room in July-December 1925 was 337 people, of which Votyaks — 225, Russians — 142, other nationalities — 10 (clubs — 18, and 76% of them were attended by women). There are 447 women in polytechnic schools. There is no information about the distribution of female students by nationality and their attitude towards men, but there are interesting figures for 1920, which say that in the I stage of all students, more than 35% of the students, at the second stage of Yuo / o, in courses 65% ', in pedagogical institutes 96%, and 99% in the university. The high percentage for universities was explained by the fact that during this period almost all men were engaged in military service in Krasnogorsk. But the ratio in grade I schools seems to be normal. Protection of motherhood and infancy. Institutions of Okhmatmlad in Votoblast: 1% of the nursery - factory in the regional city (60 beds); in the summer of 1924. worked in rural areas 5 crèches, 1925 - 7 crèches; a mother and child home in the regional city (40 beds); orphanage - (35 beds); in county towns — a children's home - (35 beds) and a nursing home for 15 beds. There is a consultation for children, in addition to the provincial town, and in rural areas. Consultation for pregnant women in the provincial town. On the spot, in treatment centers, special consultation days are allocated. In the regional city there are 2 maternity hospitals (50 beds), in the county towns there are 25 maternity beds. Midwives in the regional city 17. There is an obstetric technical school (formerly a 2-year school for nurses) to train midwives. Graduates are mainly sent to work in the countryside. Women in need of legal advice receive free legal advice from the collegiums of defense. In the city of Izhevsk, the council of social assistance is deploying. As already mentioned, a great deal of cultural work is being carried out along the line of the okhmatmlad. These figures, of course, are approximate and incomplete and only partially allow judging the work.