1. Kalmyk people before and after the revolution
"Kalmyk" or in Tatar, "khalmik" - occurs rt of the Turkic verb "Kalmak" - - to remain '. This is the name of the remnants of the people who, around 1618, in search of free lands for nomads (and perhaps for other reasons that are still unknown to us) in the amount of up to 50 thousand wagons, stood out from the powerful Oirat-Mongolian union, which occupied Dzungaria and Mongolia, and headed west through Siberia and the Urals. Only in 1632 he reached the Volga and occupied the region from the Caspian Sea on both banks of this river to the town of Tsaritsyn. Although the territory occupied by the Kalmyks already belonged to Vagan Khan (the White Tsar), who had a well-equipped fortress of Astrakhan, the Kalmyks, having subjugated the few Tatar peoples who were here, became the actual masters of this territory. From the moment the Kalmyks appeared on the Volga, the Russian pavitelstvo tried to use them for their predatory plans. So, it draws them into the war with the Crimean Khan ', organizes raids on the Kumyks, Bukharians, Kara-Kalpaks, Kirghiz, sends them to fight with Persia (1722) and Dagestan. During this period, the Kalmyks still retain, though not visible, independence. only in internal self-government, but also in foreign policy. Russia needs them as a living force that can be used for conquering goals, which is why their complete conquest was considered unnecessary. But endless military campaigns, strife within the khan's house, gradually undermine the Kalmyk people and contribute to their impoverishment. Following the model of the Russian tsar, the Kalmyk khan became a tsar, and the Kalmyk aristocracy, noyons, zaisangs, became his courtiers from military leaders, exploiting the common people. In the course of time, Russian policy completely weakens the khan's power, decomposes the administrative apparatus and abruptly begins a struggle against the national manifestations of the Kalmyks, first of all, implanting Orthodoxy among them. peculiarities, led to the fact that the Kalmyk people began to hate Russia. In 1771, a rumor spread across the steppe that the tsar had decided to convert all Kalmyks to Orthodoxy, that the tsar ordered the sons of the sovereign princes to be taken as amanats (hostages), and the "vile Kalmyks" up to ten thousand as soldiers. Soon there was a rumor that "young children are required — for what and where — it is not known." Most of these rumors were spread by the princes themselves, who were also severely oppressed by the Russian authorities and who decided to leave the Russians for China. Secret preparations for escape had been going on for a long time. The Dala Lama (religious leader, lives in Tibet) blessed the campaign and set the date of 1770-71, since “that time for the escape may be happy.” On January 4, 1771, the governor of Ubushi, put by Russia instead of the khan, before the army about 'announced his decision to leave Russia and on January 5 the Kalmyk people almost ran from the Volga to the East, to Siberia. 30,909 wagons went with the governor. Only 11.198 remained in place, mainly because they were located in the upland side, in the uluses, the owners-princes of which were at enmity with the governor, and in addition, because the ice drift that began on the Volga cut off some of them from the main forces. Only after crossing the river. The Urals, Kalmyks learned that they were taken to distant China. The Volga Kalmyks traveled a hard and exhausting path. Subject to endless attacks of the Kirghiz, Kaisaks, Tatars, exhausted from all hardships and diseases, only a third of them came to China. The Chinese government 'turned out to be no better than the Russian one. It immediately took a number of measures to weaken the cohesion of the Kalmyks, for which it split the uluses into parts. They were allowed to roam only independently, that is, who had their flocks. The poor were settled near the cities and, with the help of special instructors, began to teach arable farming. After a series of uprisings, suppressed with great cruelty, the Kalmyks settled in China, mixing with various Mongol tribes and losing all solidarity. ”With the departure of most of the Kalmyk people from Russia, the political life of the Kalmyks who remained on the Volga ended. By decree; Catherine II, the khan's power was destroyed forever. The landlords were placed in an independent position from one another and each was given an ulus in hereditary possession, but under Russian government supervision. The Pugachev movement, which broke out just at that time (1772), found fertile ground in the Kalmyk steppe. Most of the Kalmyks responded to Pugachev's call (Sept. 17, 1773) and openly joined him. In the form of repression, the Russian government! closed the national court by transferring cases to the county courts; soon at the head of the Kalmyk people, the tsarist government appointed "the chief bailiff of the Kalmyk people." In 1825 serfdom was established in the Kalmyk steppe. The people became poor and fell into decay. Since 1834, guardianship was established over the Kalmyk people, which existed until the February Revolution of 1917, and heavy taxes were imposed; (Albanian,It goes without saying that, given their political and economic backwardness, the Kalmyks were completely unprepared for the first Russian revolution of 1904. Totally illiterate, they were severely oppressed by the landowners noyons and za-sangs, who were in alliance with Russian officials ... The tsarist government systematically pursued a colonialist policy in the steppe. Russian settlers covered the Kalmyk steppe in a tight circle, constantly expanding their possessions at the expense of the steppe. However, revolutionary slogans and rumors about the events of 1905 in the neighboring provinces reached the steppe. A real agrarian revolution broke out among the Kalmyks, directed against the aggressive tendencies of the Russians. The Kalmyk princes quickly took the movement into their own hands and, by speculating on it, achieved talent for the Kalmyk people, that is, by themselves, some ghosts, including the right to elect to the newly formed State Duma. As expected, they were involved in building a new life. only the large landowners, who sent Prince Tundutov the owner of the Malo-Derbetovsky ulus and Tyumen, the owner of the Khosheutovsky ulus, to the Duma. These are the results of the 1905 revolution, the tsarist autocracy in its policy relied exclusively on the Kalmyk clan nobility. All the best lands were assigned to landlords and princes. In addition to the landlord princes, the clergy, who also owned vast lands, numerous herds and large capitals, occupied a special position. The February revolution of 1917 was met by the Kalmyk people, just like 1905, unprepared. The steppe was indifferent to the activity of its aristocracy. On March 25, 1917, the guardianship gathered a congress of "representatives" of the people in Astrakhan to organize the administration. It is not hard to guess that this congress consisted of noyons, za-sangs, Russian officials, a small Kalmyk intelligentsia and clergy. The Congress decided to serve with faith and truth to Russia and refused to support the Astrakhan proletariat. The congress established the Central Committee for the Management of the Kalmyk People, as well as ulus and aimakam committees. The congress worked out many resolutions on the reorganization of the court, school affairs, etc., forgetting about the most important thing — the land reform, which the landless Kalmyk people so needed. This painful issue was passed over in silence by the new executive committees put forward by the February Revolution. And so the people, realizing that they had nothing to expect from the masters, decided to fight for their rights. Agrarian riots began in the border zone, then the Kalmyks, who were not herders, demanded that they be equal in land use rights. The authorities persisted, and an uprising arose in the steppe (summer 1917). Punitive expeditions started working, arrests and deportations began. The second congress of the Kalmyk people, which, like the first, was without true representatives of the people, emphasized the touching connection of the landlord princes with the clergy. He issued a decree on the introduction of Buddhist teaching in Kalmyk schools, approved the decision of the spiritual council to increase the number of khuruls (monasteries) and the staff of the clergy, motivating this by the fact that Buddhist teachings help a common Kalmyk learn life. This congress did not say a word about land reform either. While the landowners and clergy were energetically implementing the decisions of their congress, the Kalmyk people remained an avid spectator. When the first news of the October Revolution arrived in the steppe, the Central Committee openly went over to the hostile camp and began work on the defense of the steppe. from the Bolsheviks. Even on the eve of October, the princes and landowners secured the admission of Kalmyks to the Astrakhan Cossacks, and now they preached the universal armament of the newly minted Cossacks. The organized counter-revolutionary government began to form Cossack regiments. At that time, in Astrakhan, power was already in the hands of the workers, and on January 12, 1918, counter-revolutionary troops approached the city fortress, together with the first Kalmyk units under the command of their ataman, Prince Tundutov. On January 24, the Astrakhan proletariat dealt a decisive blow to the enemy and the Kalmyks fled across the steppe. Under the formidable pressure of the Astrakhan people, the Kalmyk government disgracefully fled to the Don. On February 3, 1918, at a meeting of Kalmyks of the Kalmyk Bazaar, a resolution was passed recognizing the power of the SNK and renouncing the Cossacks. 'rides, who have elected their executive committee. But he did not have to expand the work. The impending civil war also seized the Kalmyk steppe, which split into pieces. This time, the Kalmyk cavalry hundreds, created in the south of the steppe, came to the aid of the Astrakhan proletariat, which had re-gathered its forces. On the other hand, relying on Tsaritsyn, occupied by the White Guards, noyons and rayeaigi and Noveli returned to the northern part of the steppe, corrupting work among the people, winning over to their side many newly assembled Red Kalmyk units. The new Congress of Soviets, convened on December 19, 1918, irrevocably takes the side of the revolutionary proletariat a, he declares a broad mobilization of the Kalmyks, who formed two regiments. In the midst of the struggle, the Executive Committee sent to Moscow for support. On July 22, 1919, Comrade Lenin addresses the first, which has become a historical appeal to the Kalmyk people. Here are its characteristic passages: “Brothers Kalmyks! The entire past of your people is a continuous chain of suffering. Your people, thanks to their economic and political backwardness, have always been an object of exploitation by their stronger neighbors. The autocratic tsarist government, which by bloody seizure extended its power to many foreign tribes, imposed a chain of slavery on the freedom-loving Kalmyk people. Having taken possession, the autocracy all the time treated you like slaves. The lands that are in your use were cut. You were forbidden to study, to print books in your native language. You were deliberately kept in, darkness in order to make it easier to oppress you. Many of you were taken into military service in order to take advantage of your darkness to use you as an instrument of oppression of others, like you, oppressed peoples ... “Standing for the protection of the interests of the working masses of all peoples, the Workers-Cross; yatskse The Soviet government is hereby declaring to you: “Brothers of the Kalmyks! that the fate of your people lies in your own hands. Therefore, the Council of People's Commissars decided to assist the working Kalmyk people in the convocation of the All-Kalmyk Labor Congress ... "Two days later, on July 24, 1919, the government signed by Comrade Lenin publishes the following historical document -" Announcement to the Kalmyk People about its new structure. land life ". Here is the first and main point of this announcement: “The Kalmyk working people declare that the lands of the Kalmyk steppe are forever free from the oppression of the rich and constitute the property of the working Kalmyk people. Detailed rules for the use of land will be worked out by the population of the Kalmyk steppe and its future government, in relation to the conditions of life and economy "... This announcement coincided with the transition of the Red Army to the offensive. Frightened by the landowners' rumors about the atrocities of the Reds, many Kalmyks rushed to flee together with their landowners from the liberated uluses, abandoning their farm and cattle. And so in the steppe, special detachments were moved to clarify the real situation to the population. In the liberated uluses, the work of creating councils quickly began to boil, and a close relationship with the Kalmyks of Don and Terek was soon established. However, the situation inside the region was difficult. The Kalmyks, exhausted by the war and hunger, did not want to fight anymore, the steppe was filled with deserters. On July 2, 1920, the first general Kalmyk congress convened, which issued a "declaration of the rights of the Kalmyk people." On November 2, 1920, the Central Executive Committee announced a decree on the autonomy of the Kalmyks by creating an autonomous region of the Kalmyk people. This decree completed the historical era of the Kalmyk people with a hundred-year stubborn struggle for its existence. From that moment on, the true economic, cultural and political construction of the Kalmo region began.

2. Kalmyk Autonomous Region and the way of life of the population
The Kalmyk Autonomous Region is one of the few regions of our Union where the population has not yet left the forms of cattle-breeding and nomadic economy. The well-being of the region depends almost exclusively on the state of livestock raising; agriculture here plays only a secondary role and has an auxiliary value. The Kalmyk region with a population of 142 thousand souls occupies the entire space of the right and upland banks of the river. Volga. Of the total population of the oblast, 75.6% are Kalmyks, 21.1% of Russians, 3.3% of Germans, Tatars and others. Its surface area is 77.126 sq. km. Its territory stretches for 500 km from east to west in a straight line. and from north to south for 400 km. The population density is 2.4 people. per G sq. kilometer. With respect to the surface, the region can be divided into two sharply different parts - the western elevated and the eastern, low-lying steppe, dropping in some places below sea level. From the north, the region borders on the Stalingrad province, from the east - with the Astrakhan, from the south - the Terek and Stavropol regions and from the west, with the Salsk district, the Don region. After numerous disputes with neighbors, the borders were established in accordance with the ethnic composition of the population. The region is divided into 9 uluses, equivalent to counties'; uluses are divided into aimaks with the right of the volost. The settlement is called. hoton. The administrative division of the region was made mainly according to living conditions (and tribal relationships were taken into account). The centers of large uluses are now fully established, but there are such uluses as Erketnevsky and Bogatsokhurovsky, which do not have their own large settlement, and ulus institutions are located in the adjacent villages of the Astrakhan province. The regional center is located in, Astrakhan, but the issue of transferring it to the Manychsky ulus, to the Elista headquarters, where regional institutions have already begun to move, has already been resolved. Fast. All-Russian Central Executive Committee of May 21, 1928 Kalm-region "became part of the Lower Volga region. The region's peculiarities are extreme poverty of nature, roadless steppe. There is not a single cultural route on the territory of the region: the nearest railway the station is located 120 versts from the western border of the region; in the eastern part, along the border of two uluses, the Volga runs along an insignificant extent, and beyond it, at 30-40 versts, the Rch-Uralskaya railway. According to natural-historical, economic and living conditions, the region is divided into four economic regions. 1) Agricultural and cattle-breeding region - the entire B. Derbetovsky ulus, the soil of which is very favorable for farming. The entire population of the ulus lives settled. 2) The cattle-breeding and agricultural region, including the Remont-ninsky ulus cut off from the Don region, part of the M. Derbetovsky ulus up to the eastern slopes of Ergeni and the Manichesky ulus. Despite the partial occupation of the population by agriculture, the main industry here will be cattle breeding. 3) The cattle breeding region includes the eastern low-lying part of the M. Derebetovsky ulus, all, except for the western part, the Manychsky ulus and all the Volga uluses; conditions contribute to the maintenance of a nomadic way of life with the device of winter roads. 4) Fishing and cattle breeding region - the coastal parts of Erketenevsky, Yaidyko-Mogazhny, and partly the Volga uluses. The main occupation of the inhabitants is fishing. So, we see that the main] occupation of the Kalmyks is cattle breeding, and only in the coastal and Volga parts is fishing and partly farming. There is almost no industry in the region. There is only one young fish industry trust of local importance, which in 1926 produced 600 thousand poods. All farms related to the fishing industry (catchers, workers, etc.) - about 7,000 or 20% of all farms in the region. The number of catchers 'inventory is 35 ° / 0 in relation to 1913, the Kalmyks' fishing farm is recovering poorly. The reason is lack of funds. The fishing industry requires a lot of equipment costs, and there is an upward trend in agriculture. The sown area in 1913 was 26,500 dessiatines, in 1923 - 19,000 dessiatines, and in 1926 - 46,000 dessiatines. The most effective measure for restoring the economic position of the steppe is the settling of nomads. This process has already begun; sedentary farms in the region are growing, but their growth is spontaneous. Unfortunately, there is a lack of timely regulation on the part of the central bodies of the region, and the material side of this huge and most responsible business is also not taken into account. One of the reasons prompting the Kalmyks to switch to a sedentary economy is the fact that the number of livestock on nomadic farms is decreasing. “There is nothing to roam with” —this is the Kalmyk's answer to the question of the reasons for his transition to subsidence. The subsidence became especially noticeable since 1923, when the Kalmyk Central Executive Committee relocated Kalmyks in Stavropol and Orenburg provinces. and the Don region in the indigenous uluses. Chairman of the Regional Executive Committee of the Kalmyk Region 'comrade Kekeev in his report gives the following interesting figures on Soviet construction in Kalmykia. In 1912 there were 27 schools in the oblast, now 134; then there were 800 students throughout the region, now there are 9,200 students. Up to 150 students study at universities; in the region itself there is a pedagogical technical school, agricultural. a technical school, one communist party school. Before the revolution there were 8 hospitals, now there are 12; dispensary 9, now 17; before the revolution there were only 9 doctors, now there are 27; there were 30 medical assistants, now 60, and so on. In 1928 there were 123 doctors and medical assistants. The activity of the Kalmyk masses is growing with extraordinary rapidity. Up to 60 percent of the Kalmyk population took part in the last re-elections. With the growth of the activity of the masses, their needs also grow. But the region has no funds. Its budget is 90% deficient. The process of settling Kalmyks to the ground is especially successful, mainly in the border regions. Here Kalmyks • build in the absence of forests, and most importantly! guides, good peasant huts, but small and uncomfortable huts, in which the Kalmyk feels like in a cage. He reaches out to the ceiling with his head and finds it extremely difficult even in such a seemingly simple matter as setting up his household belongings. In the wagon, each object has a specific place indicated to it by tradition. Moving to settled life, the Kalmyk not only part with the wagon, together with it he breaks with all the old way of life. The Kalmyk, naturally, gets the strongest impression of contact with the new life from his new home. It should show the Kalmyk all the advantages of a permanent household and agricultural labor over his traditional companion, a wagon. That is why not quite; the correct device is now practiced for a sedentary Kalmyk, an inconvenient hut. While a relatively small part of Kalmyks settled in huts, another — a larger part — continue to live in their wagons. Poor people, usually, are not able to have a real wagon, they they live in half-kibits, which come in two tsids: "jolom" and "dekgle", which resemble simple tents. A normal Kalmyk wagon simultaneously serves as: a) the living quarters of an individual family, b) a room for all the savings of this family (food, clothing), c)a place for the performance of everyday and religious rituals, d) in the cold, a shelter for cattle (lambs, camels). The space of a wagon of average size does not exceed 9 square meters. fathoms, and not only a thing, but every living creature, occupy a place in it exactly indicated by custom. The kibitka, its furniture and dishes are the property of the family. When a new family is formed, separate parts of the wagon, precisely defined by custom, are brought by both parties — husband and wife — and then, as needed, are replenished at the expense of the family economy. For the clergy, the door of the wagon is facing east, where the Dalai Lama lives. Kalmyks, under the influence of climatic conditions, put the wagon the door to the south. The wagon of the father and, after his death, the wagon of the mother is called a large wagon, in contrast to the wagons of married sons located near the parental. The wives of their sons work in a large wagon, there and food is prepared for all. Usually all the wagons; seven I) are located in a regular circle and the distance between them is forced by a wicker fence. The formed courtyard serves as a corral for camels, and other things! livestock. All this taken together is called; the Kalmyks have “khotun” or khotoy. Now any wagon is accepted into khotons, but its owner must agree to obey the customs of khoton; by this he becomes, as it were, a relative. This type of khoton can be called composite or mixed. In the third type of khoton, the class principle is also mixed; These are khotons of the clergy, as well as zaisangs and noyons, (aristocracy), quite numerous before the revolution. The fourth type of khoton is organized according to the principle of economic and economic, it includes wagons engaged mainly in cattle breeding and most often working for the owner. Finally, the fifth. hoton type — industrial; all the wagons are engaged in one trade: fishing, salt extraction, melon growing, etc. The lack of culture and extreme slaughter of the Kalmyk people developed in addition to difficult political and economic conditions (the age-old oppression of the tsarist government and their own landowners) - also under the strong influence of the religion of Kalmyks - Lamaism (species indigenous Buddhism), which is carried out by numerous clergy, forming a special group of the population. In view of the fact that the clergy still plays a colossal role in the life of the Kalmyk people, we are somewhat Let us dwell on its organization of activity in more detail. The Kalmyk clergy, popularly called "hara-makhla" (yellow cap), lives in monasteries that always roam separately from the rest of the Kalmyks. The monastery is called a khurul, it has three kinds of wagons: temples or sacred wagons, which are always white koshem, clergy wagons and wagons of simple kad, mgko! In - the poor, shepherds, etc. Monasteries, aside from the religious [purpose, are the concentration of original Lamaic knowledge, which is distributed in four specialties: theology, astrology, medicine and painting. In each khurul there are representatives of all this knowledge, as well as their students, called. "Manzhiki" at the age of 10 to 20 years. Bakshi are teachers of faith, zukhachi are astrologers; the emcheis are doctors, the zurachi are painters. All four departments of knowledge are inseparably connected with religion and serve its purposes. Bakshi is not only a teacher of faith, but also a supreme judge, whose jurisdiction over family law matters. Along with him, zurkhachi is a participant in all events, both joyful and sad, of the Kalmyk family. Marriage, childbirth, illness, death, migration — everything is done with the participation and at the direction of the zurkhachi. The latter is responsible for: a) keeping track of the years of the marriage during marriages, b) assigning happy names to those born, c) looking for the cause of the illness, d) determining what type of burial the deceased should be given, etc. In addition, the zurkhachi makes annual calculations , determines holidays, light and difficult days, as well as the time of eclipses, predicts the onset of cold and warmth and reports various information important for the steppe economy. Kalmyks still turn to different methods of healing in case of illness, then changing one to another, then using together. Taking the medicine of a real doctor, a sick Kalmyk drinks "shulum" as prescribed by the Kalmyk spiritual healer "Emchei", listens to prayers for Golyung diseases, reads from a be (medicine man) and does not refuse the services of a wandering Tatar healer. Treatment of Kalmyk emchi, in addition to various drugs, is accompanied many rituals, of which two are of a folk character. The most radical remedy for recovery is recognized as "khyuryum" - the ransom for life. It consists in a divine service performed over the patient and is always accompanied by sacrifices from the side of the patient's family in favor of the khurul or the clergy. Such healing prayer is always performed solemnly with khurul music and numerous clergy. It requires large expenditures and is within the power of only wealthy people. For the poor, the parachute is replaced by a remedy no less curative, but cheaper, namely! - removing a sick person from the household! subject causing! illness, for example, an expensive cup, horse, of a known color, etc. Art will be found an object that is disastrous for the patient's health and indicate the method of removing it belongs to the emchei and, of course, the most beneficial way is the donation of these objects to a khurul or a clergyman. The Emcheis with their assistants, healers, are the main culprits in the extinction of the Kalmyks. A number of incredible cases can be cited regarding the treatment of diseases by these charlatans. One of the old doctors of the Kalmyk region, Dr. Tsapko, at a conference of doctors in 1921, cited many cases from his personal practice. B (ogg is the most typical: a rich Kalmyk fell ill. Emcheis flooded to him, who treated him with strong broth and at the same time forbade him to give the patient water. death to emchey and other clergy 15 horses, 1 wooden house, 2 camels, 10 cows and 25 sheep The Gelung-astrologer (zurkhachi), according to the holy books, predicted to the patient that his years were over and he should die. But the Kalmyk did not want to die and sent horses for the doctor Tsapko, who found that the patient had a normal temperature. It turns out that the charlatan Emchei, wanting to receive the promised gifts, just wanted to kill the patient without giving him water. The patient was taken to the hospital by the doctor Tsapko and recovered through meyats. Du-shan heard such a case. An 8-year-old boy fell ill with dysentery. The Emchei found that the patient should be treated with the same strong broth. The unfortunate child's thirst was so strong that he once ran out of his wagons and ran into the next one - pounced on the water. But unfortunate dark parents were chasing him and did not give him water to drink, the boy died of thirst. Almost always sick with some completely curable disease, in the Kalmyk steppe, dies and this is done with full consciousness that he was treated according to all the rules of medical art and he dies only from the fact that the end of life has come, and that here, in this world, no one is able to help him, since the book of destinies tells him to die. The Emcheys still wage an irreconcilable war with doctors, supposedly the way it should be. And gullible people, unfortunately, easily succumb to such agitation. He still highly appreciates the authority of his emcheys and quietly dies out with the direct participation of these greedy parasites.

3. Life of a Kalmyk woman
In the economy of a Kalmyk nomad cattle breeder, a woman takes the first place. She cooks food, lays a felt mat (felt, which is used to cover the wagon), makes leather, sews shoes, dresses and brings up, of course, in her own way, children. The duties that lie on a Kalmyk woman are many times harder and more difficult than the work of a man who is almost a whole spends the day away from home. Long before sunrise, a Kalmyk woman rises and goes to milk the cows and unload the cattle in the field and to work. Imperceptibly. the hour of "uruni" - breakfast, to which the women should prepare their food; by this time the men and the rest of the family are up. The elder pours tea into a sacrificial cup or puts a piece of prepared food into it and places it in front of the burkhan; then he drinks tea himself, followed by others; when the food is seden, the children eat what is put before the burkhan. After breakfast, the teenagers go to the cattle, the men go to work and then saddle horses, go on the side on business; otherwise they sit in the wagons and smoke pipes. At this time, women prepare dung (fuel from cattle dung mixed with earth). Before lunch, they also brew vodka (arka), sew and repair clothes, spin, make ropes, etc. After dinner, women and girls, taking “uchi ”(Leather bags), go to the steppe to collect dry argasun for fuel and return, by the time the cattle arrives, for evening milking. The rest of the time is spent folding the fuel brought in for the winter to dry. Men usually sleep after dinner, and there comes the evening watering time. In the evening, along with the cattle, the adolescents return from the field and only then the whole family gathers. In winter, women sit more with the children in wagons, but the man's responsibility is to take care of the cattle wandering in the steppe, to clear the place of snow for the camels to spend the night, etc. Thus, the Kalmyk khoton lives day after day until the migration, which brings some revival to the monotonous life. The eldest in a Kalmyk family is a father or husband. He unquestioningly disposes not only of all property, but also of all members of the family. The woman, despite the fact that she occupies the main position in the economy, is given extremely little attention. She is a workforce created exclusively to serve the male half of the family. Bought as a wife for a kalym (khyurm), the size of which varies depending on the well-being of the groom's parents and her own, a Kalmyk woman in a new family often lives much worse than a dog from a bad owner. She should not call her older relatives by name. She is obliged to get up at the entrance to the wagon and the departure of the elders, and she herself must leave the wagon backwards. Even those words whose capital letters match the capital letters of the names and surnames of older relatives, the daughter-in-law must pronounce in a different voice than she usually speaks. She is forbidden in the wagon of older relatives to take off her headdress and shoes, drink from a cup of elders and even eat in their presence. A woman, especially a young daughter-in-law, does not have the right to be the first to speak to a man even of her family. Unbeknownst to her husband, she cannot act or independently resolve any issues about the household that she leads. Moreover, without the permission of her husband, she has no right to answer questions from strangers. And the Kalmyk woman is so downtrodden and intimidated that even now, despite the great work done in the steppe to emancipate a woman, quite often there are cases when a woman stubbornly keeps silent about the questions: "what is her name" or "how to get to such and such point ". She does this not out of fear of a stranger, but only because her husband forbade talking to strangers. "If the elder brother dies, his wife's inheritance, if the horse dies, his skin inheritance" (in Kalmyk: "Ah ukkula bergi cheres, act of biting sairi cheres ") - this is the main Kalmyk proverb reflecting the position of women in the family. It was bought for kalym, which was collected by the whole family, so it is the property of the family. And after the death of her husband, she does not leave this family, but goes to wife to the next brother. Usually a Kalmyk woman wears a red or blue long-sleeved robe on a weekday. sleeves, made of different colors except yellow; further - "tsegdyk" - a long sleeveless jacket, and, finally, - "labshik" or "birze" - a kind of robe made of colored fabric with wide long sleeves, worn over the tsegdyk. Tsegdyk and terlik are worn only by married women, while girls also wear labshiks, but they also have their own special costume. A Kalmyk girl, over a kilik (underwear), also wears beshmet (bizet), like a man, but only much longer: he almost closes his boots; on the chest it is tightly closed with a row of buttons. On the head women wear hats: a tomshu — a round cap in a kind of Tatar skullcap with a black band and a yellow top. Decorations, both on hats and on clothes, consist of patterns sewn from cords and laces, less often embroideries with gold iron. The drawing is unpretentious and most often reflects the situation of the steppe. Married women wear two braids, the ends of which are hidden in covers (shibirlik), while to their braids are often braided, for greater length, horse mane hair. At the ends, they wear metal or silver cones called "tokan". Usually a married woman wears two scarves in a special way on both sides of the dress, while the girl has one scarf, on the left side, at the waist. A Kalmyk woman must necessarily be the mother of a large family. If the Kalmyk woman does not have children or only girls are born, the husband has the right to demand a divorce, and the wife must return to her parents. The birth of children, especially boys, is an outstanding event in the life of a family and is always accompanied by a number of established customs and rituals from the earliest times. Only after the birth of a child does a woman become a real family member. Of course, there is no need to say that the Kalmyks give birth in the most antihygienic conditions. Usually, they give birth in a wagon, on a dirty floor, with the help of all kinds of healers and old women. A Kalmyk woman rarely goes to give birth to a hospital, because the law of ancestors prescribes to give birth to a child only under the roof of her husband. During childbirth, according to custom, men should not be in the wagon. If childbirth is difficult and prolonged, then, after using any manipulations such as shaking, artificial stretching and squeezing the abdomen of the parturient woman, they invite the gelung to read the prayers appointed for such a case. When the child is born, without washing, they wrap him in something soft and so leave Until the day that zurhachi - will indicate how happy, usually not earlier than the 3rd day. If a son is born, then one of the women finds the father, takes off his hat and takes him to the wagon, which lets him know about the birth of his son. The hat needs to be redeemed and the father prepares a treat for the women present at the birth. On the day and even at the hour of birth, the father cuts the ram and sacrifices it, that is, performs "kgalqgin", as in marriage, which is done for the happiness and life of the child. On birthday, usually, parents arrange a feast for relatives and neighbors, but without dancing and songs, there are also no youth. On the appointed zurhachi happy day, the child is washed along with the rags in which he was wrapped after birth. After the umbilical cord has fallen away from the child, usually on the 5-6th day, a zurkhachi is invited to the newborn to indicate his fate and assign a name. National and religious names in the genus Zrdni (treasure), Ubushi (monk), Ochir (rod), Bedma (lily), Basang '(Venus), etc. are given more often only to the first son and, in exceptional cases, to a daughter. The next children are already named after the tracts, rivers, lakes where they were born. If children die in a family, then names of a different type are given, more often animals. Kalmyks believe that the mortality of children comes from the action of evil spirits, and in order to mislead them, children are given names of animals and others, for example, Noha (dog), Chon (wolf), Me-kle (frog), Mukebun (ugly boy) and others. Sometimes it is impossible to enter a wagon where there is a newborn at all: they are afraid that they will not jinx him. And if someone has to see that the black carpet of the wagon is down, then you must first ask permission to enter. Another means to save children is to dedicate them to a khurul (monastery) called manzhiks. The birth of only the first son, sometimes other sons, is celebrated with special triumph, while the birth of a daughter, with the exception of perhaps the first one, is generally not particularly pleasing to the parents. Therefore, only with the first-born, all ceremonies are observed, with the rest they do without zurkhachi, and the parents themselves give the child a name. Immediately after childbirth, the parent is given cold water to drink, and on the very first day she gets up and starts working. Her food, if possible, is improved. From the very first days, the child is fed with lamb fat. The babies are swaddled quite tightly, tied to a board.When the child is already so old that it can hold on to its little hands, the mother carries it under her shoulder, as if riding on her right side, so that one of the baby's legs is in front, and the other is behind the mother's right side , and the little hands cling to either the shoulder or just! for the clothes of the mother who holds the Ero with her right hand. Thanks to this carrying of children, their legs are bent; This, according to the Kalmyks, makes them good riders, while a good and caring attitude towards a boy is paid much less attention to a girl. This is overtaken by those that the son is a continuation of the offspring of the father, he is also the future owner. From the first days of her existence, the girl experiences all the hardships and deprivations associated with her gender. Barely covered with sheepskins in winter and deprived of any dress in summer, she first frolics and runs under the gusty snowstorms, then under the burning rays of the summer steppe sun, driving rams into the hot; but then, growing up, he gradually begins to help the mother to milk the sheep and mares, wearing leather cribs with milk; he picks up the wool of the rams whose parents are working on shearing, cooks dung, the bridge of the cauldrons together with the women, looks after the younger brothers and sisters, cleans the wagon, and in his free time he does sewing. It is usually not accepted to teach girls to read and write.When the girl turns 13-14 years old, and the boy 15, the parents send messengers for the closest relatives and invite the Gelungoa. After prayer, the son or daughter is introduced into the wagon of older relatives from the mother's side and subjected to the rite of cutting off the temples there: the so-called original hair, which has never been touched by scissors, is cut off. After this ceremony, the girl turns into a maiden. She tighter and tighter pulls her jacket (about | which 'see below), dresses in a beshmet; now everyone pays attention to her. She is a bride. From this time on, parents begin to think about marriage. For the Kadmyks, marriage is a duty and care, parents, while the young play only a passive role. Usually the groom's parents are the first to go in search of the bride. The bride's parents are just waiting or learning about the neighboring women. Parents find brides themselves, which they announce to their sons; they do the same with their daughter. And here the main thing is the will of the father, although without the consent of the mother, the marriage still cannot take place. When choosing a bride, attention is paid to her wealth and beauty, her temper and reputation of her parents, and the heads, arr., To working abilities: physical strength , the ability to sew, weave, housekeeping. The wife, in the words of the Kalmyk, is a godsend! That is why every family tries to marry the boy as soon as possible and keep the girl from marrying for a longer time, as a labor force. Before the Soviet regime, there was no age for marriage or marriage established by law, religion or custom. Usually married — a man at 19, and a girl at 15. However, in questions about years, the year of birth always had, and now it still matters, the year of birth, since, in addition to coming of age, marriages cannot, in the interests of family happiness, take place when a girl is 16 or 19 years old, and a man is 25, 37, 49, etc. every 12 years, counting the summer not from the day of birth, but from the day of conception. When parents want to marry their son, they turn to “zurkhachi” (astrodog) to indicate whether such and such years can be married son, what age should you look for a bride and when and under what conditions it is most useful to start a matchmaking. In addition to these indications, as well as the interests of economic and estate, it is necessary to keep in mind also kinship. For marriage, only the kinship of the male line is important, but on the female line it does not have an obligatory value. The process of matchmaking and marriage among Kalmyks of different clans and uluses is, in general, the same, but some rituals are performed differently. Derbet Kalmyks happens in this order. The groom's parents equip the elderly! relative, good! knowing national customs, with one; "Side" arches to the parents of the intended bride. The messenger never speaks directly about the purpose of the visit, but in the midst of the conversation, one way or another, he lets you know about the real reason for the visit. If the owners of the kibitka do not accept, under any pretext, the arca brought by the guest, then the wedding will stop there. If vodka is accepted and drunk, it is a good sign, and the matchmaking can be continued. Then the groom's parents again send matchmakers, who this time, in addition to vodka, carry a white scarf with a silver coin, glue or sugar tied into it. Clay is a symbol of the continuity of the union, and silver is a symbol of happiness and wealth. The handkerchief is given to the mother; the girl then becomes a bride. This is where the matchmaking ends. The interval between matchmaking and marriage ceremonies is long; the day of the first ceremony is appointed by the same "zurkhachi". On the appointed day, the groom himself goes to the bride with close relatives and friends. This trip is called "the bridegroom's bride". The groom's train carries at least a bucket of vodka, one boiled ram, tea, candy, etc., depending on the state, and again a white scarf for the bride. Before entering the wagon, the guests are checked all the gifts brought, and special attention is paid to the fact that the boiled ram contains all the suitable parts: the lack of one of them may cause a refusal or a delay. Next, the bride is taken. All the same zurkhachi determines the day of the groom's departure for the 'bride, the summer of the man who must first touch the bride when she is taken, the summer of the man who takes her on the horse, the color of the horse, and the color of the bride's outerwear. For the sake of the accuracy of the fulfillment of all the instructions of the zurkhachi, which is associated with the happiness of the future family, he usually accompanies the train himself. The bride's parents have been informed of all the instructions of the latter. Upon the arrival of the groom with friends to the bride, a feast is arranged. At the moment of taking the bride sits on the family bed, surrounded by girls, crying and wailing. The person appointed by the zurkhachi approaches her first, the girls attack him and beat him, but his friends are in a hurry to rescue him, they grab the bride, amid the general commotion, take her out of the wagon, quickly put her on the prepared horse, and the whole train of the groom hurriedly leaves. After the well-known rituals, in the elders' wagon, from the side of the groom, he performs the rite of throwing fat into the fire of the hearth. Then there is a ceremony of tearing the skin of a wedding ram: the skin of a slaughtered bar on stretching over the threshold with the wool down so that half remains in the kibiTka, and the other outside it. The guests of the bride take the outer piece of skin, and after the groom, the inner one and begin to pull each group towards themselves. The tug ends when one side either rips the skin off the other, or the skin rips. A happier outcome is recognized if the groom's side overpowers.In the groom's wagon, the zurkhachi and gelungs perform a religious rite consisting in reading prayers. At the end, all the men leave, and the women comb the bride's hair like a woman's into two braids and hang a “sheberlik”; from that moment on, a woman should no longer show her open head to strangers. Then all the guests leave. Among the Kalmyks of the Torgutov tribe, not only relatives and acquaintances, but also the groom's parents usually participate in matchmaking. In the first three days, a young woman leaves the wagon only under a blanket. Only on the 4th day, when all the guests leave, she goes without a blanket to the wagon of her new parents and starts working there. The Kalmyks' wedding expenses are significant and it takes a lot of time to complete the entire wedding ritual. Usually the wedding 'ceremony lasts from six months to a year, and sometimes two to three years. Of course, it lasts longer for the poor than for the rich, since in a short period of time it is difficult to acquire all the things required by the rituals. However, at this time, the predominance of economic (at first over the rituals) affected the wedding. of the whole ceremony, for which they either combine several ritual acts into one or, which happens more often, throw them out altogether. The poor now do without any rituals. There are cases when the spouses, wishing to avoid any expenses and rituals, agree to kidnap the bride themselves Having passed, after marriage, to a new clan, a woman is recognized here as a relative only as long as the family exists; after the death of her husband, if he died without leaving children, or after a divorce, the wife returns to her parents. If the wife dies without having given birth to children, half of the dowry is returned to her parents, and half is donated to the khurul (monastery). If there are children left after the death of his wife, then sometimes the husband passes on the family For her family, no more than 1/3 of the wagon inventory from the one brought by her, but nothing from the cattle-breeding economy. During the life of the wife, she does not have separate property, and when the family is divided, when the son is separated, a part is allocated to the mother, equal to the filial, but less, than my father. The same division occurs during divorce. Divorces among Kalmyks were relatively easy, especially for a husband: infertility of a wife, mortality of children, an incurable illness of a wife, if the onset of the illness was before marriage, a quarrelsome character, family misfortunes — all this could serve as a legitimate reason, so that the husband would send his wife to her parents. The issue of divorce is resolved by the family, and only the dispute about property forces us to turn to the bakshi, the lama or the authorities. On the contrary, the divorce at the request of the wife took place only under pressure from the bakshi and the lama, and there must be any reasons for this. In case of a voluntary divorce, the wife receives either all or half of the dowry from the wagon inventory, and from the livestock only what he will give (the husband. But if the husband drives the wife away, he must return all the dowry she brought. When the wife herself does not want to live with her husband, nothing is given to her from the household. If the wife runs away from her husband, then) she is returned by force and presented to the court bakshi or. lama and if, by the court of the latter, the husband is found guilty, then! the wife is allowed to leave him and marry another; otherwise, the wife is forced to live with her husband. Such families are placed under the supervision of neighbors for three years. If during this period the husband behaves well, the wife is obliged to live with him. If the divorce was due to childlessness or other serious reasons, then both, after a divorce, can enter into new marriages, in other cases, only the husband does not lose the right to marry.In case of divorce, children remain with the father, and if he turns out to be the culprit in the breakup of the family, the mother can take the children, but she loses the right to leave again Married. Popular views encourage only divorces due to childlessness. With children, there are almost no divorces. Childlessness is sometimes, however, extremely rare even among the rich, is eliminated by polygamy. By religion, the number of wives is not limited; the popular view does not fully recognize polygamy, which is evident from the proverb : “The first wife is from God, the second is from people, and the third is from the devil.” The facts of bigamy in recent years are almost never met at all.

4. Kalmyk woman after the revolution
The Kalmyk woman, thanks to the cultural backwardness of her people, formed under the influence of the cattle-breeding economy, the age-old exploitation of the landowners-noyons, zaisayags and the clergy supporting them, is one of the most backward women in the Union. We have already got acquainted with the life and position of the Kalmyk woman before the revolution. This is; - an eternal toiler, shackled by harsh customs and traditions, a thing that was bought as a wife, kicked out when she could not give birth to a son, and beat when she was guilty. Deprived of all rights, depersonalized to the last degree, she lived a real animal life. The extremely strict conditions of family life, marriage solely by the will of the parents, complete submission to the father, then to the owner-husband and in general to the elders, belittled the Kalmyk woman and made her into a downtrodden and intimidated woman. She got used to the fact that the representatives of the clergy regulate her life, give her advice and teach her how to act in various everyday difficulties. These are the faithful guardians of the conservative! of everyday life, all their energy was directed at entangling the Kalmyk people and Kalmyk women with the nets of their ignorant and harmful activities. They have deliberately always been, and even now, remain the patrons of traditions and rituals, from which breathes barbarism and vestiges of antiquity. They still help the man in his striving to keep the woman in a powerless position. With such support, men are reluctant to change the way of life and the position of their wives. They still not only force a woman to work to her last strength, but for any disobedience or disobedience they are punished with a whip. On this occasion, the Kalmyks have a walking saying: "A man who sharpens his knife will eat meat, a woman who sharpens her tongue sees a whip." In a remote, remote steppe, a Kalmyk lived, or rather vegetated, deprived of any opportunity not only to change, but even to improve her position. Of course, many women understood the horror of their situation, but what could they do? As a general rule, a Kalmyk woman never learned to read and write. Before the revolution, Kalmyks in general were afraid to send their children to school, fearing that if a child studied, they would put a cross on him, he would be baptized and leave the steppe. And there was no point in teaching girls at all. Teach, they say, do not teach — he will get married anyway, a stranger will be! This is how the parents reasoned. As a result, it was as difficult to meet a competent Kalmyk woman as a Kalmyk who did not know how to ride a horse. The first decisive battle to the old way of life, stubbornly supported by the population, was given on the issue of wearing the so-called. kam ^ ash: The fact is that the Kalmyk women have established a custom for a long time, according to which large breasts are considered a special shame for a girl. To avoid large breasts, a Kalmyk girl from an early age must wear a camisole — a narrow vest that tightly fits her chest and prevents the development of the chest. Needless to say, a Kalmyk woman is terribly disfigured thanks to the camisole. In addition to stopping the growth of the chest, the chest does not develop at all. And this circumstance leads to the fact that almost always the first child dies, because the mother does not have milk. The frequent illness of the Kalmyk woman also occurs due to the camisole. In order to put an end to this ugly legacy of a dark past, in order to forever rid a woman of this barbaric custom, the Kalmyk Central Executive Committee on April 20, 1921 issued a decree prohibiting all women and children from wearing camisoles. Here are the main articles of this law: “Wearing a camisole, which is rooted in the Kalmyk region, is not caused by any reasonable grounds and religious beliefs, brings innumerable disasters to the growing population. Stopping the growth of the whole body, the development of lungs, mammary glands, the camisole is the cause of illness (tuberculosis - • consumption) and mortality of children born to mothers who wore a camisole. region on April 12, 1921 decided: Art. 1. On the entire territory of the autonomous region of the Kalmyk people, to forever prohibit the wearing of a camisole, its storage and production. Art. 2. From the day of the promulgation of this decree, all persons wearing a camisole must take it off and rip it open. Art. 3. The local judge shall have the right to examine, through medical personnel and attesting witnesses, women, all suspected of wearing a camisole. Note. For lack or absence of medical personnel, the judge may invite a local teacher or other female official. 7. Punitive measures against violators of this decree are applied by judges starting from August 1, 1921, Art. 8. Local women's departments have the following responsibilities to enforce this decree: To inform local judges of all cases of violation of the decree. 1) The right to appeal against judgments made on the basis of this decree. 2) Petition the Regional Executive Committee for the issuance of special prizes for propaganda and agitation against the camisole among the population. This first word flew throughout the Kalmyk steppe about a revolution about a woman. Some joyfully, others with tears and lamentations, some voluntarily, others out of fear of judgment and punishment, had to rip up their children’s jackets and thus give them the opportunity to grow and develop normally. It is even difficult to say what enormous political and educational significance this decisive and timely defense of the Kalmyk woman had. Since that time, all women have learned that they have a loyal ally and defender of their rights. And (they received rights unheard of and completely unfamiliar to them. A special order of the Kalmyk government prohibiting the kidnapping of girls and forcibly turning them into wives, a new law on marriage, divorce, and finally, attracting a woman to participate in the construction of a new way of life for her people - did not remain for the Kalmyk woman Organizations created specifically for working among women have energetically taken up the implementation of all these decrees that radically change the life and position of a Kalmyk woman. In order to approach the female mass and embrace all women scattered over the vast expanse of the Kalmyk steppe, it was necessary to create a special organization of the most developed women-activists, the so-called women's delegate corps.By 1927, there were already up to 800 delegates throughout the region — these were the first conductors of culture to the female environment. True, 92% of them are still illiterate, they themselves need in help and education, but they represent a reliable core of those who decided to fight the old way of life and slavery The revolutionary power now boldly rests on it. One of the first tasks is to teach women to read and write. And here I had to face the common Kalmyk misfortune, the misfortune of a small, oppressed people for centuries. The old regime pursued a policy of depersonalizing nationalities, or, as they called it, foreigners. The Kalmyks were not allowed to have their own schools, newspapers and literature. As a result, the people do not have a definitively developed writing system, there is no unified grammar of the Kalmyk language, there is no dictionary, and there are no teaching aids. And only at the present time work is underway to develop a unified Kalmyk grammar and writing system, interesting experiments are being done to replace the extremely complex Kalmyk writing with the letters of the Russian alphabet. Of course, under such conditions, despite the presence of 58 educational centers in the region, it is extremely difficult to teach delegates to read and write. The difficulty is further increased by the fact that the instructors-liquidators of illiteracy are 80% Russian; at best they can teach a Kalmyk woman Russian, not Kalmyk, literacy. Under such conditions, all work with delegates is carried out exclusively through reports and conversations. A well-known test of the activity of delegates and, in general, of mass work among women is the re-election to the soviets. If we take into account the above-mentioned difficulties of work among women in general and the difficulties of preparing delegates, then we will have to admit that the results achieved in the election campaign are extremely good. Thus, throughout the region, 8,800 women turned up for re-election to the councils, that is, 26% in relation to all those who appeared for the re-election or 25% in relation to all eligible women. |; Elected to the councils 418 or 16.1%, of which AIK'e - 14, OIK'e - 3. It should be noted here that elective women do not carry out much practical work in AIK. This will become clear if we take into account that at 83/0 the elected are illiterate, and besides, there is no comradely assistance from the AIK chairmen. Quite often the chairpersons do not even give any instructions to elected women. And, nevertheless, despite this, the attendance of AIK's meetings, even in the nomadic period, when council members often live several tens of miles from the AIK's headquarters, always amounts to 85-90%. There are already women promoted: the assistant prosecutor, the member of the court, the president, the union, the head. Oblono, head. Okhmatimlad and others. The number of women in trade unions is 1.739; jurors in 1927-500; members of the party and candidates, in 1927-76 (of whom 17 were members of the party). There are 770 girls in the Komsomol (or 21.8% in relation to the entire organization of the Komsomol of the Kalmo region, moreover during the period; from January 1 to) April 1, 1927 52 girls were admitted to the Komsomol, which is 23.3% in relation to all those admitted. During this period, special cells of the Komsomol of girls have not yet been organized in the Komsomol, although there is a decree on this by the Regional Congress of the Komsomol. There are several industries in the Kalmo region, which employ up to 1,500 workers, of which 872 are female workers. The fishery does not work all year round, but only in spring and autumn, on the sea. Spring fishing usually takes place in late March, April, May and early June; autumn fishing season — September, October and November; female workers for Putin's time are recruited partly from the surrounding area, but most of all they come from the upper Volga. Only three years ago the Kalmyks began to work in the fields, their number is growing every year. In the spring fishing season, there were 195 Kalmyk women for every 872 women workers, that is, 25.5% of all women workers. Great job among; Kalmyk women are carried out by the 0001-th commission for improving the life and work of women. She conducts ulus and aimak conferences women. She also equipped and opened a dairy Kitchen for children at the Kalm-Bazarin children's consultation, organized a school; cutting and sewing in Kalm-Bazar) with a number of students of 30 people, regional and ulus legal consultations are held. On the initiative of the commission, in 1926, women's vegetable garden artels began to be organized. This year there are already 16 of them with a total number of 236 members. The main task of the garden artel is to teach a Kalmyk woman to profit from the land and at the expense of the land to improve the nutrition of her family. Of course, at first there are many shortcomings and extremely serious; such a big deal as the creation of women's artels. In the Manych ulus, for example, these artels are under the direct supervision of the commissions for the improvement of labor and life. Such leadership in such a lively business fetters the initiative of the members of the artels, which, of course, is reflected in the most deplorable way in the results of the work. The downside is that in these artels, where the most advanced women are gathered, educational work is poorly organized. There is no doubt that the task of creating all kinds of artels out of women, and primarily gardening artels, is very important and requires great help from Soviet institutions, mutual assistance committees, cooperative and other Organizations. The gardeners must be allocated convenient plots of land, organize plowing, supply the artels with implements, seeds, etc. From the successful fulfillment of all these questions; overestimate not only the well-being of a given artel, but, in general, the whole matter of raising the well-being and culture of a woman, and, consequently, of the entire Kalmyk people. The experiment of the Bazarin ulus in organizing a “seamstress” of unemployed women was very successful. On March 8, 1927, at the initiative of the Regional Zhenotdel, a school of cutting and sewing of regional significance was opened here. After the end of the course, it is planned to organize a workshop for accepting various kinds of orders. In another place, in Bagutovsky - aimake, Yandy-ko-Mochazhnogo-ulus, Kalmyk women organized themselves into an artel to make cheese from milk, or, rather, "panera". This work, at first, was difficult, since they did not immediately get down to business and there were many obstacles that hindered the development of this work, for example, the lack of milk machines and the inability to make dairy products well. Most Kalmyks live in several families in the so-called. hot-nah. In this situation, such institutions as a hospital, a club, a reading room, of course, cannot cover the entire population of the steppe.Taking into account this circumstance, the Regional Women's Department for the fullest possible coverage and involvement of Kalmyk women in Soviet construction, in the work of changing life , -organized red mobile wagons, which should work in the most backward nomadic areas. Each wagon has a paramedic-midwife with a complete set of all supplies for childbirth and! to provide emergency medical care to a working woman. Needless to say, this is already a circumstance. brought extraordinary benefits to the nomad. The fact is that, according to Kalmyk traditions, a wife must give birth under the roof of her husband. That is why it is extremely difficult for a Kalmyk woman to persuade her to go to the hospital's maternity ward. She prefers to stay at home and use the services of dubious home-grown professionals, old women and other attendants. The results, as we already know, were disastrous. Most newborns, and often the mothers themselves, will die. Now the picture is changing.! The midwife is at hand and is always ready to help the woman in labor in her kibitka. The Kalmyk family is completely malnourished, mainly because the Kalmyk woman does not know how to use milk. every Kalmyk farm has dairy cattle and enough milk, from one of the main tasks of the kibitka is to teach Kalmyk women to process milk and use this precious product to improve family nutrition. Therefore, each red wagon has a separator with a Churn. Dairy checkpoints have been organized at the kibitka, where each Kalmyk woman can process milk into cream and butter completely free of charge. Thus, dairy products, which are now completely disappearing, begin to bring income to the Kalmyk family. Red Mibitka is also building educational work around these economic undertakings. At the kibitka, a delegate group is organized, which works, according to the general program of the delegate meeting, a circle for the elimination of illiteracy, if possible, a circle for the illiterate, a circle for sanitation and hygiene. In the red kibitka (a cell of the Komsomol of girls is being organized. Much work is expected, in the future, to be deployed in the red kibitka to protect mother and child, for which exhibitions of children's and women's clothing, sets of demonstrative dishes were arranged in the kibitkas. 7 red wagons. At the head of these wagons were exclusively Kalmyk women who received special training. Unfortunately, this year, obstetric care could not expand as widely as this "It was assumed that due to the lack of medical staff. 5 wagons worked without medical workers, although there were funds to pay for them. This is explained by the fact that the Kalmo region is generally poor in both nursing staff and higher staff. From Astrakhan, paramedics-midwives do not go to work in the steppe, and midwives from the indigenous nationality for now; For the first Experiment, a two-week plan was established for the work of the wagon, why it was decided not to create any circles, educational programs, groups of delegates at the wagons, but to limit themselves only to conversations, with the help of an exhibition of protecting mother and baby, exhibitions of dishes, clothes, etc. A survey of two red wagons (Manych and Ikitsikhura) carried out by the Regional Department showed that these red wagons attracted the attention of the Population. In the Manychskiy ulus, at one of the parking lots, the Kalmyk women were so impressed by the separator and the churn that they decided to buy a car in a stack; and in order to have someone to work with her, two girls were assigned to the yase, who were obliged to learn how to work with a separator. As a result of the work of the red wagons, it became cleaner in the wagons, the Kalmyk women began to wash the dishes, bathe degas, and so on. character, along with an insulting oversight of the technical order, expressed at least in the fact that the wagons were equipped with magic lanterns "huts", the managers were not taught how to handle them, why the lanterns were inactive, it is necessary to note the fact that the two-week parking kibitki on one! the location was completely inadequate. The kibitki did not have time to unfold their work, the Kalmyk women did not have time to swing [to go and see Even the kibitka, let alone to usefully learn all that | the new thing that the wagon brought to the steppe, how it had to roll up and move to another two-week camp. Of course, all the rough work of the red wagons will be taken into account! and next year they, increased in number and better equipped, will greatly benefit the Kalmyk woman. Created by a caring hand, the red wagons will soon become real conductors of the liberation of the Kalmyk woman from the old way of life. In conclusion, we note that the Kalmyk people, having passed the hard way of the Russian tsarism, enmity with other nationalities, overcoming the difficulties after the revolution | demarcation from the surrounding regions and peoples, boldly embarked on a systematic internal construction. Only now, having firmly established themselves on their land, the Kalmyk people got the opportunity to start improving their economic situation, raising their culture and changing the whole way of their hard life. And no matter how difficult the tasks facing him are, he will fulfill them completely. And then the Kalmyk woman will take her rightful place not only in the family, but also in the entire working and state life of her people.