1. General outline of the republic and the population
Chuvash Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic x) is located between the Volga and the Sura, occupying an elevation between them and a more low part along the right bank of the Volga. Of all national associations, the Chuvrespublika lies most close to the center of the USSR — it borders on the Central Industrial Region, and is only 700 miles away from Moscow. Center of the Republic - mountains. Cheboksary There is still a dispute about the origin of the Chuvash. By language, they belong to the Turkic tribe. Recently, the theory that the Chuvash are the descendants of the Bulgarians, a people who lived along the Volga and before the Tatar invasion, was a large economic and cultural center, has been actively defended. In any case, if the Chuvashs are not direct descendants of the Bulgarians, nevertheless, they were part of the Bulgarian state, as one of its large parts. Chuvash constitute the majority of the population of the republic (up to 80%); followed by Russians, Tatars and Mari. According to the census of 1926-27, the population reaches 893.687 people. In terms of population, the Chuvash ASSR has been an autonomous region since 1920, and only recently was transformed into a republic. Lenia Chuvashia is one of the largest national formations of the Volga region. Many Chuvash live outside the republic (over 500,000;. A small area of ​​the republic (19,000 square kilometers) creates a large population density. One fourth of the space is occupied by the forest, which was once much more extensive. The space occupied by the Chuvash was also large. But Russian colonization , which became especially active in the 18th century, gradually took away these vast lands and in the end the Chuvash found themselves tightly compressed in a small space. This had a disastrous effect on their economy. The Chuvash, primordial farmers, their main occupation. they were sentenced to land shortages. The tsarist government did not try to get rid of this land shortage, neither by resettlement, nor by improving the economy. Backward forms of land use (communal), technical backwardness, created complete insecurity for the Chuvash peasant. Yes, and the Chuvash land is not fertile: with frequent arid it does not yield good harvests.On average, for each peasant household there are no more than 4 dessiatines. It is necessary to note a number of backward forms in land use, which also hindered the development of the Chuvash peasant economy. These were the communities. They persisted for a long time because when cutting land to the Chuvashes after the liberation of the peasants, the land was allocated for whole villages, and sometimes together for several villages. Land surveyors dissuaded themselves from the complexity of land relations and lack of knowledge of the language. Before the war, the Chuvash economy, in most cases, could only satisfy its needs and, despite this, there was an export of grain, about 5 million poods per year. Russian capitalism has made its efforts to plunder the Chuvash people. The exploitation of the Chuvash peasants increased all the time before the revolution. They created their own bourgeoisie and their own kulak stratum, which robbed them no worse than the Russian capitalists. The economy of the poor Chuvash, which was thus under double exploitation by its growing bourgeoisie and Russian capital, fell from year to year. The cattle became smaller and decreased in number (the cost of a Chuvash horse in 1915 was half the average cost of a horse in Kazan province). Likewise, the Chuvash village did not have even the slightest economic opportunity to improve agricultural production. inventory: the plow continued to reign in the economy, the plow was a rarity. This incessant exploitation turned the Chuvash people, once rich in lands and forests, having in sufficient quantity everything necessary for their existence, into a downtrodden, deprived of land by the tsarist regime, impoverished to the point of complete impoverishment. The Chuvash lagged behind not only in the economy, but also in all other areas. The peasantry constitutes the overwhelming majority of the population of Chuvashia (931/2%) - The industry is in its infancy and the total number of workers does not exceed 1,000 people. (in industrial establishments with at least 16 workers). But handicraft is highly developed among the Chuvashes. The insecurity of their economy makes them look for outside occupations. B At present there are about 3,000 small handicraft enterprises, employing up to 3,000 people. Solitary handicraft is even more developed. Up to 110% of the entire population is engaged in handicraft trades. Both industry and handicrafts are predominantly woodworking. The average earnings of a single handicraftsman are unusually small (50-60 rubles per year). The position of the handicraftsmen before the revolution was even more difficult, since they invariably fell into exploitation by the buyers. Trade was also poorly developed among the Chuvashes. Their purchasing power was very limited. Only the most necessary things were bought in the market on a limited scale. The export was entirely concentrated in the hands of a small handful of the Chuvash and Russian bourgeoisie. From their midst, entrepreneurs sometimes stood out, possessing very significant means and conducting a large trade turnover. As in the economy the Chuvash lagged significantly behind the Russian peasant, so in everyday life they retained much of the outdated. Unsanitary conditions, widespread prevalence of domestic diseases — that is what characterizes the pre-revolutionary Chuvash village. The tsarist government was not at all concerned about getting rid of these abnormalities. It supported the preconceived notion that nothing can be helped here, since the Chuvash must inevitably degenerate. Among the Russian peasants, this created the basis for a disdainful attitude towards the Chuvash. In their beliefs and rituals, the Chuvash preserved a lot of the old, the remnants of their pagan religion are still preserved, despite the fact that for about 200 years the bulk of them were forcibly baptized. They continue to believe in a multitude of evil u0, i.e., the spread of which is caused by living conditions (dirt, unsanitary conditions, etc.) - and not by direct infection from a patient. kind spirits with whom you need to be able to get along. Having adopted Christianity, they treated Christian saints in the same way as their spirits. They tried to propitiate the saints with sacrifices. If they did not receive what they asked for, then they dealt with them: they threw away the icons, broke them, etc. Their idols kept their pagan character and were always associated with agriculture. The most important and at the same time interesting are the spring uyavas, when large round dances are held for 5-6 weeks, as well as akatui (plow's wedding), set up in front of the spring arable land. Akatui consist in games, wrestling, horse racing, etc. The remnants of family life have survived in family life. They are characterized by the power of the elder in the family, the subordination of all family members to him, the suppression of the personality of women and other traits. The elders of the clan were the keepers of the customs that governed the life of the Chuvash village. They decided all sorts of things. It was very difficult for the tsarist government to force the Chuvash to reckon with the law and courts. The Chuvashs quite rightly considered the court and laws only a means to deceive the peasantry and bring income to the Russian government and officials. The actions of the latter — bribery, intimidation, etc. — corresponded precisely to this notion. For a Chuvash peasant, who not only did not know the laws, but often did not know the Russian language, in most cases it was completely useless to go to court. Taking advantage of its darkness and oppression, all the servants of the Russian autocracy, from rural officials and sergeants to the highest ranks, robbed the Chuvashes on every occasion. Even the popes and those, in addition to their "legalized" extortions, were engaged in bribery.They frightened the Chuvashes with accusations of paganism and observance of old customs, extracting money from him for promising not to inform the “authorities”. All this understandably created hatred for the servants of the Russian autocracy and Orthodoxy. The Chuvash were least of all inclined to resort to their protection. Lynching was a frequent occurrence in the Chuvash village, which preferred to deal with criminals by their own means in accordance with old customs. In the same way, divisions, divorces, etc. were committed by the eldest of the clan without any written documents, only on the basis of his word. It seemed that under such difficult conditions of existence of the Chuvash people, the craving for enlightenment would be completely killed in it and it would never have its own culture. However, despite all the obstacles, the Chuvash were able to use those very small opportunities of enlightenment that they had before the revolution. They were able to single out, however, a small number of people who received secondary education. By the time of the revolution in Chuvashia there were up to 1,200 primary schools and 20 two-year schools. In these schools, most of the teachers were Chuvash (up to 1,800 people). This circumstance played a big role in preserving some features of identity, national feeling, language, etc. Although only the first year of study was in the Chuvash language, and the other two were in Russian, the Chuvash teachers did not expel their native language at all. For this they were subjected to frequent harassment and attacks. At one of the noble congresses (1911), a deputy from the nobility of the Kazan province, Artsybashev, accused the school authorities of instilling national and revolutionary ideas through the organization of Chuvash schools. This was, of course, far from the truth, but nevertheless, in terms of education, the Chuvash were doing better than other national minorities. The literacy of the Chuvash population is currently relatively very high (men 60 ° / o, women not less than 10 ° / o) -Since the 70th year of the last century, literature in the Chuvash language began to be published. But although up to 1,000 titles have been published since that time, these were in most cases books of spiritual content, various lives of saints, etc. None of these books, of course, gave the Chuvash peasant the opportunity to learn anything about his urgent needs in agriculture, everyday life, etc. Chuvash are very sensitive to culture and have a rich folk art, which only now has received the opportunity for further development. In the same way, the Chuvash are the most musical people of the entire Volga region. In the past, the most common instrument they used was a bubble (syrnai), now a gusli and a violin have been added to it. They also show their abilities for artistic creation and embroidery. All these are just small remains that have survived over the centuries from folk art. But they speak eloquently about the possibility of the revival of the Chuvash culture and about the desire for this on the part of the Chuvash people themselves. Unbearable living conditions forced the Chuvash to rebel against Russian rule several times: they took part in the uprising of Razin and Pugachev. The Chuvash population met the latter on the way from Kazan to Alatyr with bread and salt. The hatred for the Russifiers accumulated over the centuries resulted in the beating of officials and especially priests. But all these attempts were, of course, doomed to failure - the rebels had neither organization nor sufficient strength. Only at the dawn of 1905, when the intensified class stratification of the Chuvash countryside began, was the growth of the political consciousness of the peasantry noticed. Petty-bourgeois intellectual groups are beginning to be imbued with the idea of ​​national autonomy, they demand their "participation in the economic and cultural development of the Chuvash people, not understanding the class" character of the revolution. At the same time, the proletarianized part of the poor peasants in the Chuvash countryside begins to look for outside employment. They are faced with the general movement of the Russian proletariat, and this helps them to form their class identity. During the revolutionary movements of 1905-1907. Chuvash peasants are already putting forward quite definite revolutionary demands. Since there were almost no landowners' lands within the Chuvash region, the program of the Chuvash peasants in relation to land allotments in the event of a revolution was different from the requirements of the Russian peasantry. The Chuvash demanded the return to them of the lands that were forcibly seized during the colonization. Thus, they insisted on the allocation of land to them outside the boundaries of the Region. The movement took on a spontaneous character; peasant unions were formed, meetings were gathered all over the place and it came to bloody clashes. The movement was especially strong in Cheboksary Uyezd, where all local authorities preferred to leave their posts and hide. But after some confusion, the government begins to take repressive measures, brutally suppressing the movement, to which the peasantry responds with a series of terrorist attacks. Many of the Chuvash paid with exile or prison for such performances. In their orders to the State Duma (where the Chuvash led one Trudovik deputy), the Chuvash peasantry continued to demand the return of the land, as well as the elimination of the Russian bureaucracy and its replacement by elected authorities from the population. In addition to this spontaneous peasant movement, the activity of individual revolutionaries and revolutionary groups was rather weak. and rested on the populist-Socialist-Revolutionary ideals. The period until February 1917 was marked by reaction and further exploitation of the Chuvash peasantry. Immediately after the February revolution, the organization of the Chuvash power in the localities began, in most cases it was headed by the revolutionary leaders of 1905. The Social Revolutionary groupings gained the predominant influence and seized the national Chuvash society in Kazan, which was formed in the summer of 1917, and the newspaper "Khypar". The Union of Small Nations of the Volga Region, also created in Kazan, in which the Chuvash played an important role, dissociated itself from the political struggle, setting itself only cultural tasks. Only in the Chuvash military organizations did individual Bolshevik soldiers meet. Some councils of peasants' deputies (especially the Cheboksary one) were more Bolshevik. In the period of the February revolution, the main movements of the Chuvash people took place, thus, under the sign of purely national demands, obscuring class contradictions. Only the October Revolution posed the task of economic emancipation of the Chuvash peasantry, shaping its class consciousness. The first period of the revolution took place in the struggle of the soviets (Bolsheviks) against Cheboksarsky, headed by the Socialist-Revolutionary military Chuvash organization in Kazan. The attempts of the latter to disperse the soviets were unsuccessful, the Chuvash peasantry more and more came to understand the slogans of October and to the idea of ​​the need to support the gains of the revolution in the person of the Bolshevik soviets. But he had to endure with me, trials, before taking on the peaceful economic and cultural development. Kolchakivshchyna, which captured a number of Chuvash regions, once again showed the Chuvash all the charms of the old system. If the Chuvash intelligentsia supported Kolchak and the Socialist-Revolutionaries, then the peasantry, as the forces accumulated, entered into a struggle with them and provided substantial support to the detachments of the Soviets. After the liberation of the region from the White Guard gangs, the councils and communist organizations resumed their work, now noticeably stronger. Finally, in June 1920, the autonomous Chuvash region was created. But again, it was still impossible to start peaceful construction. The defense of the revolution demanded heroic efforts from the Chuvash too. Their best party workers went to the front. - The Chuvash peasants, who were for a long time not far from the front line, had to carry out surplus appropriations that were unbearable for an already depleted economy. And yet they not only fulfilled them completely, but even with surplus. However, this created a certain dissatisfaction in them, taking advantage of which the kulak and petty-bourgeois groups provoked an uprising against Soviet power. The latter, however, did not have solid ground, although it did a lot of harm to the very same Chuvash peasants. And, finally, the crop failure in 1920-21 and the complete crop failure in 1921-22 completely undermined the Chuvash economy and put it under the threat of complete collapse. The economy of the Chuvash peasant was already weak, due to the lack of land and continuous constraint on his land holdings, and due to the technical backwardness, the reasons for which have already been mentioned. It is impossible to describe all the unbearable suffering that arose as a result of hunger — it came down to cannibalism; rampant death raged in the Chuvash village. But this was her last disaster. After the elimination of hunger, intensive economic and cultural development began. In just three years, the pre-war standards were achieved in agriculture, and now it continues to improve further. Although slowly, but systematically, work is developing to supply the countryside with improved agricultural production. inventory, fertilizer and artificial grass seeds. A successful struggle is being waged against the threefields, and agriculture is taking solid ground. cooperation, etc. As for the industry, in the absence of the previous base, its deployment is difficult, but over the years 2 plants have arisen: starch-syrup and fruit-drying. Cultural construction is also moving rapidly. The network of schools from the pre-war period has been completely preserved, in addition to them, a number of educational institutions have been opened (pedagogical schools, agricultural technical schools, a forestry technical school, a workers' faculty, a music school, an instructor's school for woodworking, a number of 1st-level schools, a communist school, etc. :) ... The number of Chuvash students studying in higher educational institutions is constantly increasing (1925-26 — 400 people). There are newspapers, 2 periodicals, a theater, a museum, a number of cultural and educational societies, circles, and even a Chuvash-cinema, which has begun to release its pictures from Chuvash life. The village is also covered by a number of political and educational institutions (cottages, reading rooms, clubs, circles, etc.). There is a vigorous fight against common diseases; the number of medical institutions is increasing. Party organizations are gaining more and more popularity among the poor and middle peasant groups of the village, who, taking shape as a class, are the most active builders of the future of Chuvashia. It would be necessary to say a lot in order to understand the significance of the economic, political and cultural upsurge of the Chuvash people. We will only talk about a part of it — about working with women.
2. Life and life of Chuvash women before the revolution
The life of a Chuvash woman in an environment of pre-revolutionary life is very difficult. And although the work to emancipate the working Chuvash woman naturally could not yet touch all aspects of everyday life, it did not destroy many still existing abnormalities and prejudices generated by the economic enslavement of the Chuvash in tsarist Russia, nevertheless, the work done in this regard is extremely great. Only a comparison of the old way of life of a Chuvash woman, with all its negative features, with the current situation, can give a picture of the achievements of this work. In difficult conditions of material need, standing on the border of impoverishment, in an atmosphere of cultural backwardness, oppression and darkness, a Chuvashka was born. From an early age, the child is surrounded by this environment, which does not allow him to develop normally. Even at the present time, in comparatively better material conditions, with a greater development of education and health care, the mortality rate of Chuvash infants is quite high. Growing up in such an environment, a Chuvashka, already in childhood, must take on the burden of everyday domestic work, helping her mother. She also has to learn embroidery and needlework. ' This painstaking work not only takes away her best years, instead of filling them with school, but also contributes to the widespread spread of eye disease (trachoma). As soon as the girl grows up, she acquires a new concern — to babysit the rest, the younger children. Only on rare occasions is a girl sent to school; in most cases, it is believed that she does not need it at all. A man who is in charge of everything, money and in general all complicated matters, needs some more education, and a woman must do exclusively housework. Chuvashka has long been accustomed to working on an equal footing with a man, both in the field and in other jobs. It even left its mark on her appearance. So, the Chuvashka spends all his childhood at home, getting used to working from childhood. By the time she grows up and becomes a bride, she already knows how to manage the house, went through the long science of embroidery, became (a good needlewoman. If she possesses these basic qualities of a Chuvash girl, then she is considered a good bride. However, family members often hesitate to marry her off) Not so long ago, it was a fairly widespread custom for boys to marry 15-16 years old, and girls to marry for 25 years. This is partly due to the fact that the girl is valued in the family as a labor force and therefore they try to keep her longer. On the other hand, the groom's family is exactly the same expects to get him as a wife a good strong worker in the prime of his life.In the old days, when the custom of paying the bride's ransom (kalym) was in full force (parents received a higher payment for an adult daughter. Even now this custom is preserved in many places ransom. It is an echo of the old wedding customs that prevailed not so long ago. This custom shows well the dependent position in which you find yourself Chuvashka was playing. In this respect, she can be compared with the women of the eastern countries. In the same way, she did not have the opportunity to decide on her own marriage. Here the will of the father was sacred to the whole; he could ask about her desire, but it was not necessary at all. ' Only recently have parents begun to listen to the voice of their daughters. However, before marriage, girls have the opportunity to date guys and here they often find suitors. For this, there are special autumn and winter Figs. 1. Chuvashki at work. Girls' holidays, where girls and boys get to know each other. They, of course, did not give her anything useful ', being most often carriers of infectious diseases, superstition and ignorance. These holidays are furnished with various ceremonies and rituals, songs, games. Girls are considered; they are stewards and the guys are treated. Here they play their favorite game - stripes. This game consists in the fact that a whole bunch of stripes is distributed from the ends into the hands of the players - the couple who have the ends of one stripe must kiss. Various musical instruments, so beloved by the Chuvash, are also present at these evenings. Guys who go to these parties are trying to look out for themselves a suitable cry. Girls, in turn, try to attract guys, since the Chuvash have a belief that every girl must get married. If she does not marry, she will have to be the wife of an evil spirit in the next world and wash his linen. As soon as the bride is spotted, matchmaking begins — buying a bride. About the role of buying a bride in Chuvash life is sung in one old Chuvash song: “Once I sent a matchmaker, matchmaker, From the first time I did not go, did not go. I also sent a matchmaker, didn’t go again. I took it and sold it to a Tatar; A Tatar has money like dirt, And we have like chips, like chips. ”These few and stingy words perfectly convey the state of a poor man when he does not have enough money to buy a bride. It is interesting to trace the wedding ceremonies of the Chuvash, characteristic of the old way of life, because they express a very pronounced view of a woman as a forced creature, subordinate entirely to the elder in the family, a man. The matchmaker comes to the bride's family and stands under the mother with a belt whip in her hands and asks if the parents agree to give their daughter for such and such. After consulting each other and talking with the daughter, which takes several days, the answer is given, and if it is positive, various preparations are made for the wedding. They agree on the ransom amount, which can be from 3 to 100 rubles. depending on the wealth of the groom and the merits of the bride. There were weddings and “abduction” —by kidnapping of brides, but this did not get rid of the ransom, but only reduced it. After a series of ceremonies and celebrations, a wedding day is set. Before him, the groom is walking off his bachelor time, and the bride mourns her girlhood. On the wedding day, the groom comes to the bride with a whole train, from where they go to church. The bride is riding. When leaving the outskirts, the groom drives up to the bride and, throwing open the veil, looks into her face. Then he strikes her three times with a whip (or whip). He does this only to show her that he will look into her eyes, that is, love her, but for disobedience he will strictly exact from her, and as a lord and master will beat her. Thus, this ceremony also emphasizes the role of a man in the family as a ruler and a woman as a more submissive being. The same continues in the daily life of the Chuvash after. her marriage. It cannot be said that the Chuvash men treated women badly. On the contrary, they are very good family men, they often live without quarrels and even consult their wives in many cases. But a number of customs, which once constituted the only laws for the Chuvash village, continue to weigh on a woman even after her marriage. She is revered by them as an unclean being; so she cannot appear in front of older men without covering her hair and legs. Because of this, Chuvash women often have poorly developed legs, since they constantly keep them shod in thick onuchi, as well as baldness, from the constant wearing of a headdress. Having become a married woman, the Chuvashka also bears the brunt of household chores and, in addition, works on an equal footing with a man in the field. IN; depending on the ability to work, she enjoys more or less respect. Only sometimes did the customs develop in her favor. So, for example, according to Chuvash customs, it was not considered shameful to have illegitimate children, and in property rights (the right of inheritance, etc.) they were equated to legal ones. Also, divorce was not considered reprehensible. On the contrary, he was considered a fairly common occurrence, and his ceremony itself is not complicated, but interesting nonetheless. The divorced turned to the eldest of the clan and, if he considered it possible, after getting acquainted with the case, to separate them, then this was done as follows: the divorced husband and wife were put together, tied with a sash; one of the elders of the family cut this sash, that is, performed the rite of releasing them from any obligations in relation to each other. After that, the divorce was considered complete and the divorced had to bathe in the river, as if to wash off everything related to their life together. Swimming in the river, they said: "As the banks of the river never converge, so we would not converge." It is necessary to mention some more customs, which, most likely, were borrowed by the Chuvash from the Tatars. So, for example, among the Chuvash pagans, polygamy was allowed. But the latter did not receive any wide distribution before, and now it occurs only in exceptional cases. Another custom allowed a young, childless widow to marry the brother of the deceased. k Chuvashka Didn't try to protest against these customs before the revolution; she considered them unshakable and absolutely necessary. We saw that the Chuvash's childhood does not give her at least a crumb of knowledge necessary to protect herself from ignorance and superstition. Therefore, the Chuvashka was (and is still to a considerable extent now) the main stronghold of old customs and all kinds of prejudices. Not knowing the very benefits of education, she believed that she did not need to send girls to school. They must learn the same thing that their mother learned, that is, homework, embroidery and needlework. And since the economic situation did not improve before the revolution, her children continued to grow up in the same oppressive material and living conditions as herself. In every misfortune, in every difficult case, the Chuvashka turned to sorcerers and witches. Superstition among men is much less developed, and there are almost no male healers. 'Only a woman, downtrodden and illiterate, considered a witch and a sorceress to be her highest authority. At the birth of a child, a Chuvash woman does not turn to a midwife (and they are not always there), but uses the services of village midwives, who, in the words of the Chuvash health department, use "the most barbaric manipulations" - throwing pots on the belly of a pregnant woman in order to cause turning the child, hanging women, pulling the child out of the woman's belly with rusty hooks from the lamp, etc. It is impossible to describe all these tricks and crimes, as a result of which an uncultured Chuvash peasant woman is crippled and dies from the horrendous work of village attendants. This also leads to high infant mortality. Thus, the life of a Chuvash woman from birth to death passed within the four walls of an unpretentious hut, first under the authority of her parents, and then her husband. If the Chuvashka had some leisure after her hard, daily work, she spent it in gossip and gossip with her neighbors, since nothing better could be thought of. Of course, she did not take any part in the social life of the village. In this respect, she sharply differed from the Chuvash men. The latter always strive for knowledge and, despite the extremely difficult situation before the revolution, they have nominated a significant number of teachers, doctors and other workers from their midst. And outside school, a man could enrich his knowledge. Many men went to work, to work outlets, where they often learned a lot of interesting and new things. For a woman, such paths were closed, and men very rarely spoke to them about anything not related to household chores. Priests, healers, midwives — all of them took advantage of the downtrodden position of a Chuvashka and benefited from it. If there was no way out for a Chuvash woman in real life, then she sought consolation in religion, in observing various rituals, etc. Slowly from her husband, she carried the last crumbs of her meager wealth to the priests and healers. For this they "consoled" her. Therefore, before the revolution, the Chuvashka was religious, sometimes to the point of fanaticism, and strove to educate her children in the same spirit.It should be noted that one more main character trait of the Chuvashka developed especially due to all these conditions. This is her mistrust and secrecy, which so hindered and hinder her work among the Chuvash. She can no longer believe that someone 'unselfishly wishes her well. But if you win her trust, then she rejects this isolation. And, despite her downtroddenness, the Chuvashka has a lot of creativeness in herself. This can be seen at least in the adornments of her national costume, which she so stubbornly continues to adhere to (no more than 2-3% of women do not wear a national costume). It has already been said how much time the Chuvashka spends on embroidery and needlework. They are very valuable in their beauty and originality. Chuvashka can be proud that in the past her costume had a great influence on the costumes of neighboring peoples (Mari and others, although at present this outdated and unhygienic costume has become a great evil for her.) In such difficult conditions, in addition, deepened by a number of natural disasters, the first years of the revolution, work was to begin to emancipate the Chuvashka "appay" (that is, the aunts, as the Russians mockingly called her.
3. Work among Chuvash women during the years of the revolution
Chuvash women have been working for a few years. It could begin in a planned way only after the civil war and famine, in connection with the general economic construction. The most difficult thing was to start it in an atmosphere of economic and cultural backwardness and continue without interruption. There was a shortage of women workers. At the same time, it was necessary from among the Chuvash themselves to put forward some asset capable of doing work. The Chuvashka, hitherto completely removed from public life, had to be involved in both party and Soviet work. Opportunities for such a broad work were not always on the face, but with the general economic, political and cultural growth of the young republic, its base is becoming more and more stable. Soon after the October Revolution, the awakening of the Chuvashka peasant woman begins. She begins to realize her position, tries to look at her surroundings with different eyes. Natural disasters, especially hunger, have stirred up women, who, along with men, jointly fought against these disasters. At the same time, the age-old isolation of the Chuvash people was destroyed — for the first time a hand of fraternal help was extended to him. This assistance was provided by the Russian proletariat. We will cite here a story about one Chuvash social activist, whose work is indicative of the awakening of the women of Chuvashia, which began after the October Revolution 1) “Our downtrodden, illiterate, sold and bought for kalym“ appayka ”—and she is already striving for Soviet social work ... Here in front of me lies a voluminous calendar in the Chuvash language for 1923; Turning through it, I suddenly come across a photograph depicting one of our village “appay” sitting next to Klara Zetkin, with Zetkin's shoulders wrapped in a veil of a Chuvash woman painted with national patterns. The Chuvash text under the photo tells the following: the figure shows a peasant woman from the village of Sinial (New Village), an illiterate, non-party Spani. This woman was the organizer and leader of a female labor artel for knitting and embroidery in ') The story is borrowed from Petrov's book "Chuvashia", 1926, a hungry year. This artel, with the help of Moscow, which supplied it with materials, expanded its production quite widely and made it possible for its members and their children to escape from starvation. At the end of the famine in the fall of 1922, during the October celebrations, this S'pani arrived in Moscow, to thank the Moscow proletariat for the assistance rendered to them by the Chuvash population throughout the famine year. The calendar indicates that Spani is not alone and is not an exception among the Chuvash, and that the revolution gradually involves an enslaved Chuvash woman in public work. ”Such a difficult time for Chuvashia brought forward a number of women social activists who did significant work. In a time of hunger, a number of artels were organized, which put forward, at least in small numbers, some asset from among the Chuvash themselves. If in the years of famine they united only with the aim of fighting it, then later, along with the economic and cultural upsurge of the republic, a number of new tasks were set. The Soviet government freed the Chuvash woman, along with all oppressed women, from the yoke of age-old prejudices, and gave her legal rights equal to that of men. The woman became a full member of the family, the owner of the rightfully owned part of the property; finally, she can decide all public affairs on an equal basis with men. But, in order to fully implement these achievements in real life, it was necessary to involve the Chuvash in the work of party and Soviet institutions. In the situation of the Chuvash countryside with its economic and domestic backwardness, this task is very difficult. “It is sometimes difficult for an ordinary peasant Chuvashin to come to terms with the idea of ​​a woman's right to equal participation in public life with him. In this respect, educators are the most sympathetic to the equality of women, apart from party members. Thanks to these circumstances, women still make up a very small percentage in the ranks of the party. A meeting of heads of women's departments, instructors and organizers among women of the Chuv Republic, which took place in January 1926, once again resolutely put forward the slogan of involving a Chuvash peasant woman — “a peasant woman from a spinning wheel” —in the party. There is no doubt that in the near future the results of this work will continuously increase. Great results are obtained by attracting Chuvash women to the Komsomol. In the atmosphere of Chuvash life, the Komsomol acquires great importance. No wonder they call him "the creator of the future." He has to bear on his shoulders the struggle against the economic and especially cultural backwardness of the Chuvash countryside. ‘The overwhelming majority of the cultural workers in the countryside are members of the Komsomol. It must be said in this connection about one of the difficulties of developing work in the countryside. The fact is that the population of Chuvrespu bliki is scattered over small villages with a population of 400-500 people. This often inevitably leads to the dispersion of cultural forces, which are already very few in the republic. Therefore, the growth of grassroots party and Komsomol cells, and the creation of local cultural centers around them, allows not only to expand the work, but also to conduct it in more depth, capturing the most abandoned and remote corners. Chuvashka is also gradually involved in this work. The number of Chuvash women in the party is growing (in 1925 - 3% with a small number of the total number of party members, in 1926 more than 4%). The total number of women (including non-Chuvash women) in the Chuvash party reached 10% of the total membership in 1926, and 13% in the Komsomol. It should be noted the growing number of pioneers (26% of the total). This speaks for the fact that the Chuvashka girl breaks out of the environment of the old way of life in which she hitherto grew up. The participation of the Chuvashka in delegate meetings, which are her first school, gives significant success. The numerical growth of female delegates (7,048 people in 1926, of which 6,675 are in the villages; says that the mass of peasants is more and more covered, and an increasing number of women are involved in public, collective life. The qualitative growth of the delegates' meeting does not always keep pace with the quantitative one, but continuous and energetic work is being done in this direction. The elimination of political and general illiteracy among the delegates themselves has already yielded significant results and continues as before at an unrelenting pace. Workers among women have already realized that the pursuit of quantity can often produce negative results. “Better less, but better” should be the slogan here. First of all, it is necessary to destroy the idea that a woman cannot perform social work on an equal basis with a man. This is possible only if the women of the community show themselves to be good workers. In the first years of work among the Chuvash women, this pursuit of quantity affected to some extent. Its results showed up very quickly. The elections to the soviets in 1925-1926 were less favorable for the Chuvash woman than the previous ones, for the number of women elected to the soviets. This is due to the fact that in the previous elections there were few authoritative and good-working women. The weakness of the election campaign and the increased, in connection with these circumstances, the mistrustful attitude of men played an important role. From this fact, the departments of workers and peasants have made appropriate exits, which will make it impossible to repeat such cases. However, it must be said that in many respects a Chuvash woman shows herself much more actively than men and her interest in public life, participation in it, increases. so, for example, as early as 1923 in a number of villages women took an active part in the fight against moonshine, becoming the worst enemies of moonshiners. Thanks to the efforts of the Chuvash women, peasants who are members of the executive committees, a large number of moonshiners in a number of villages were detained and brought to trial. As for the participation of women in the social life of the village, from isolated cases at the beginning of work, it becomes a common occurrence. Even in a number of villages, which before the revolution were the darkest corners of Chuvashia (like, for example, Staro-Akhperdino, Tsivilsky uyezd), the presence of women at gatherings along with men has become commonplace. On the example of this village, it is generally interesting to trace the increase in the activity of a woman, her gradual liberation from the chains of the old way of life. Before the revolution, this village was one of those where women did not even visit outside their village. Many Chuvash women would hardly be able to answer the question of which road leads to the village located 15 miles from their village. It was possible to meet Chuvash women barely counting to a hundred and unable to distinguish a three-ruble note from a five-ruble one. Until recently, the mothers or wives of the Chuvash Red Army men walked 150-200 versts to Kazan; carried rusks on their shoulders to their sons or husbands; despite the fact that there was a railway. They were afraid of trains, just as they used to be afraid of everything new and therefore preferred to walk. In a word, the village was the most backward and lived according to old grandfather's customs. There could be, of course, no question of not only recognizing a woman's rights, but even of her partial independence. And in this bearish corner, a few years after the October Revolution, its own revolution began, the revolution of the Chuvash woman. One of the girls in the village married a loved one against the wishes of her parents, who wanted to give her for a richer groom. Until now, the will of the parents in the village was considered law. However, the girl managed to insist on her own and the parents were forced to yield. This set an example for other girls to shake the foundations of old traditions. Two other girls committed no less crime from the point of view of the Chuvash village. They performed on the stage of the village theater, which neither women nor girls did before, considering it shameful. This act alone served as a rich material for the indignation and gossip of village gossips. But what they did next; was perhaps an even greater violation of old customs. We have already said that the Chuvash considered education on the side to be immoral for women. And now this immorality has taken place. The girls went to study. However, as the author of the note on these events adds, the village eventually got used to this way of action. This is how the revolution of the Chuvash woman takes place. These cases are not isolated. The woman herself begins to take the path of the public. ' If at first only a few of the poor, the Red Army women and other leading single women entered this path, now the delegate corps unites several thousand peasant women. By their composition, in most cases they belong to the poor strata of the countryside; a significant number (approximately 1/3) are, and average. Thus, the class principle is carried out here, and the struggle against kulak elements is supported by well-organized women. In a number of different Soviet, professional, cooperative and other institutions and organizations, the Chuvash woman gradually takes her rightful place. The number of cooperative women reaches 11 ° / 0 in relation to the entire cooperative population. Women actively work in rural, rural municipality and canton councils. They participate in the work of committees of peasant social mutual assistance, ranging from rural and ending with the Central Committee. In a number of institutions, Chuvash women work as trainees. The promotion of women to work not only in local institutions, but also in central ones should be noted as a particularly positive fact. We already see a Chuvash in the cooperative bodies, in boards and audit commissions. The highest percentage of women in trade unions is 22%. The justice authorities, which are called upon to protect the rights of women, according to the main provisions of the Soviet regime, should also involve 4 women. This is especially true of a number of cases arising from the old way of life. Communication between the departments of female workers and peasants with institutions of justice is widely practiced. The women themselves participate in court proceedings as lay judges. The supreme body of the republic, the People's Commissariat of Justice, has 2 women as members of its collegium. It would take a long time to list all those organizations and institutions in which the work of women is becoming more and more natural. The specific data given at the end of the brochure speaks best of the size of this work. The issues of enlightenment are especially acute for a Chuvash woman. Extensive propaganda and cultural work was carried out and continues. Illiteracy among adult Chuvash women is eliminated through delegate meetings and educational centers. Work is ongoing to increase the number of girls in primary school. Of the total number of pioneers in the republic, girls make up more than 1D. But not only the lower school is won by the Chuvashka. Every year, several dozen women are sent to special and higher educational institutions, workers' schools, communist schools, etc. Now the Chuvashka herself strives for enlightenment. If she cannot get it at school, she works in a number of clubs. Thus, in many places, circles for the study of the women's movement, schools of cutting and sewing, etc. have been organized. The active workers among women also increase their training. From 15/1 to 1 / N-26, two-week republican courses for training and retraining of workers among women took place. Chuvashki made up the overwhelming majority of these courses. The courses, in addition to replenishing the knowledge of workers among women, gave the ambassador an opportunity to discuss the main issues of work, as an exchange of views between the course participants. It is quite obvious that reading rooms should devote a significant part of their attention to work among peasant women. It cannot be said that until now this has been fully realized. Only recently has attention been paid to the organization of a "peasant's corner" in the huts-reading rooms; there are also special days (one per week) dedicated exclusively to work among women. It must be said that political and educational work is greatly hampered by the lack of literature. There is especially little literature that would deal with issues related to the life of a woman. Demands for literature are heard from all corners of the Chuvrespublika. In this regard, all possibilities are used and literature, albeit in small quantities, is being published. So by March 8, 1926, brochures about the International Women's Day on March 8, about the All-Union Communist Party of Bolsheviks and work among women, about nurseries and consultations, and, finally, the play "Babi's Prize" were published in the Chuvash language. The women's issue is also given a place on the pages of periodicals. In the local newspapers Kanash and Trudovaya Gazeta there is a “woman's corner”, where materials on work among women are published 2-3 times a week. The participation of women in the press is expressed in the movement of selkoroks, the number of which has been increasing all the time. It is necessary to point out the desire of women to organize labor handicraft artels. It has already been said how in the years of famine, these artels often spontaneously grew. In most cases, the initiative for organizing them belongs to the departments of workers and peasants. The latter, in a famine year, having only 1,000 poods of grain and 100 million money (for Sovznak), managed to develop a wide network of artels (13 artels were organized in the Cheboksary district, and 14 in Tsivilsk). Chuvash women willingly go to the artels, they are hardworking, but the lack of funds does not make it possible to expand this business widely, although there is always a desire on the part of the women themselves to organize artels. With the wide spread of domestic diseases in the Chuvash village, these issues acquire great importance. The Chuvash health department says in its report: "A poorly cultured Chuvash woman, a peasant woman, is almost never served by institutions for the protection of mothers and babies." The mortality rate of infants in Chuvrespublik is 29.22% (the report refers to the beginning of 1925;. Over the past 2 years, there have been, of course, a number of improvements and significant work has been done, however, the situation is still not safe. The need for obstetric care does not give in accounting, midwives throughout the republic are considered almost units (in rural areas), Chuvashka continues, in most cases, to resort to the help of village midwives and doctors. Although there are maternity beds at hospitals, they are not enough. They can serve a small number of women giving birth (no more than 5%, since their radius of action is 17 versts) is too large with a dense population. Often a Chuvashka herself does not seek medical help. It is necessary to intensify the agitation and educational work on the protection of motherhood, in addition to the one that is constantly being carried out in order to accustom her to this. Only then will the Chuvashka understand that she is crippling herself by addressing the grandmothers and midwives. This is a spontaneous scourge of the Chuvash people, which grew out of their economic oppression, ignorance and antihygiene. Fighting it requires decisive and broad-based measures. It must be said that women are more at risk of trachoma than men, as they are engaged in more painstaking and dirty work in unhealthy conditions. 'A lot of work has already been done to combat trachoma. As early as 1922-23, medical students were sent to the Chuvash countryside, who did a lot of propaganda work; in 1923-24, 3 eye teams worked in the field, in 1924-25 two eye hospitals were added to them. The number of eye beds at medical centers in 1925 in comparison with 1921 increased three times. The health department has outlined (possibly already implemented) the organization of 5 eye hospitals in the areas most affected by trachoma, the organization of ophthalmological points with a hospital, eye surgical departments at each local hospital, and the invitation of 5 permanent eye teams. There are 2 trachomatous orphanages and a number of other institutions. In the fight against trachoma, propaganda work is very important, which should explain under what conditions trachoma flourishes. This work primarily concerns women, it teaches them to educate their children, protecting them, if possible, from antihygienic conditions. A number of other diseases (typhus, malaria, tuberculosis; they are also quite common in the Chuvash village and an equally vigorous struggle is being waged against them. lectures, sanitary courts, special films are shown, etc.Tasks and goals of protection of mothers and infants. are explained to the population in special editions and lectures. A consultation on these issues has been introduced. In addition to the houses of mothers and children, orphanages and similar institutions existing in a number of places, a nursery is of great importance. Unlike some regions, where the population has not yet fully realized the full benefits of this undertaking, the Chuvash, especially women, willingly go to meet them. They not only recognize the usefulness of the nursery, but also provide them with all possible material assistance. Thanks to this, the number of creches increases from year to year (sic) from 1924 to 1925. their number has quadrupled). In addition to temporary creches in years. Cheboksary and Tsivilsk are permanent. In addition, there is a connection between women and children's institutions; the protection of motherhood and infancy becomes close to the Chuvash. In an environment of economic backwardness, material assistance provided to women through the departments of female workers and peasant women is of great importance. It consists in the free supply of firewood and other essentials to the most needy. The Selkor movement growing among the women of Chuvashia promises us that the life of the Chuvash people and their needs will be covered by them themselves, and they will often tell us about the difficulties in work that should be overcome joint efforts, as well as about their victories and achievements. In conclusion, we note that the Chuvash community is showing great interest in working among women. This is evidenced at least by the fact that the first picture released recently 'Chuvash-cinema "Sar-Pige" (woman) is dedicated to the emancipation of the Chuvash woman from the age-old shackles of slavery. Work among the Chuvash women living outside the Chuvres public (Bashrespublika, Ulyanovsk, lips. , Samara Gubernia and Tatrespublika) follows the same paths, although somewhat more slowly, due to the scattered Chuvash population and a number of other conditions. However, a number of achievements are evident here as well. The main one is the more and more awakening activity of the Chuvash themselves. So in the Birsk canton the Chuvash organized a 13-person vegetable gardening artel "Zarya", and with the proceeds from the sale of vegetables, they entered into cooperation. There are many such cases. Chuvashki are interested in practical endeavors. They themselves want to actively participate in Soviet construction. And they participate: for example, in one locality of the Bashkortostan Republic, a Chuvashka-Komsomol member is the chairman of the village council and, thanks to his work, enjoys enormous popularity. In the Ulyanovsk province. there were cases of women staging performances in the Chuvash language, etc. The desire for a collective farm (vegetable gardens, the purchase of separators, weaving machines, etc.). active participation in public life and co-construction is also characteristic of a Chuvash woman living outside the republic. The story of one of the workers among Chuvash women, Vasilisa Pavlova, clearly speaks of the huge path that the Chuvash traveled under the soviet power. As a child, she wanted to study, but her parents said: "Where do you go to study, you still won't be a priest." Then she told how, after the revolution, the young woman “found out the essence of Soviet power” and began to study. “After graduating from the same party school, Fig. 2. Women's asset of Chuvashia. Began to work among our backward Chuvash women. It was very difficult to accustom them to meetings, because we only have 7 literate people out of a hundred, but still I manage to do something. With complaints they now go to the volunteer organizer, they have to appear in court in defense of the peasant women. In the past!) This figure refers only to the area referred to in the story. The general literacy among the Chuvash is higher. year there were "8 peasant women in the soviets, and this year (1926) there are 13 of them and they work on an equal footing with the peasants. Participate in cooperatives and in the committee for mutual assistance. the widow and squeezed her one and a half corrals of rye. The Chuvash peasant women understood the benefits of the pioneer detachments and enlisted the guys as pioneers. In my volost there are 6 pioneer detachments, in which there are about 150 people. " in the Chuvash village and in the life of a Chuvash woman, in particular. ”Local workers are very modest about the results of their work.Comrade Pavlova writes that “we managed to do something,” but this “something” is very large; Deploying its work at a time when famine, epidemics, almost complete collapse of the economy squeezed a small republic in a tight circle, the Chuvash women's department found the courage to openly look danger in the eyes. In this 1921 year, in one of its reports, the women's department cited a phrase that must not be forgotten: “We are faced with a terrible task: to educate this dying woman, educate her politically, and we undertake this.” Only less than six years have passed, and this task is honorable fulfilled by many percent. And if there are even greater difficulties ahead, is it possible to doubt overcoming them if you get acquainted with all your previous work? Of course not, and you just need to deepen and expand the work already in progress. There is a good start and a solid foundation for this.

4. Materials about work among Chuvash women
1. The composition of the delegate corps: (according to the data of the beginning of 1926). Total delegates - 7.967, delegate meetings - 79. The overwhelming percentage of them are in the countryside (over 90%). There are no exact figures, just like there are no exact figures for the distribution by nationality. Chuvash constitute the majority, so, for example, out of 3.014 delegates of the Cheboksary u. — Chuvash — 2.294. Workers employed in the governing bodies of the department of workers and peasants in the Chuvrespublika are mostly Chuvash. An idea of ​​the social composition of the delegate corps can be drawn from the figures of the Batyrev district, where 1.052 delegates are distributed approximately: 6О ° / o T poor people and widows, 35 ° / 0 middle peasants, 5% of women employees and teachers. The size of the work is indicated by the figures for 3 months 192o (January-March throughout the Chuvrespublika). During this time, delegate meetings were held in the city — 50, there were 2,096 women, citywide — 7, there were 380 women, 56 trade union meetings (in the city), there were 131 women and 7 district meetings in the city, 138 people were present. In the village — volost delegate meetings — 85, attended by 6.345, rural — 437, attended — 10.761. Average attendance at delegate meetings is over 50 ° / o. The total literacy rate among the entire female population of the republic is about 10%. How successful is the elimination of illiteracy among women delegates can be seen from the figures from the survey of women's departments from 26 / III-25 to 8 / 1-26. 200 women, and by the time of the survey 267 women were studying again, Yadrinsky district eliminated the illiteracy of 1.271 women. In total, in 4 counties for the year (19257 illiteracy of 2,087 women was eliminated. B 192 / year from 1 / U1 to 20 / YSh, courses were held in Moscow for the training of women workers among the nationals, where there were 22.2 Chuvash women. in the party, the Komsomol and the pioneer movement According to the center, as of 1/1-1925, there are 1,300 communists in Chuvrespublika, of whom 96 are women (7.4 ° / 0), Chuvashes — 42, Russians — 49, others - 5 and on 1/1 - 1926 only 2.464, women - 229 (9.3%), Chuvash - 102, Russians - 121, others - 6 (according to the Chuvash Women's Department on 1/1 - 1926 166 , 9% of the total number of party members, and on 1/1—1927 90 party members and 200 candidates). In the Komsomol there are 1.161-13% of the total number and pioneers, 2.826-26% of the total. the percentage as the age decreases — there are twice as many pioneers as the Komsomol. This activity of the younger generation is an extremely positive sign. The percentage of Chuvash women in the Komsomol and pioneer movement is probably higher than in the party. 3. Women in the Soviet, professional and operational construction. (Soviet construction — figures for 4 counties, with the exception of Cheboksary). For 1 / 1— 1926 women! members of village councils — 451, voliS-regiments — 3, district executive committees — 4, city councils — 20, candidates — 4. Cheboksary u. (July 1926): women members of village councils — 184, wikov — 3, wik — 2, revision. com. - 45, in public organizations of choice - 87, CEC - 1 member. and 1 cand. Mutual aid committees — rural KKOV-335, members of audit commissions — 252, VKKOV — 4 and members! revision. commissions — 3, UKKOV — 6 and revision. commissions — 7, TsKKOV — 3, and 2 candidates. According to the center of women, members of the village councils of 1924-25 accounted for 11% / 0 of the total number of members of the villages. and in 1925-26 — 7.9 ° / 0. Trade unions — members of the women's trade union as of April 1, 1925 — 1.716 (19.9%, out of a total of 8.621) and on 1/4 — 1926 — 3.767 (19.1 "/ o to a total of 19.683), many of them carry out work in the professional line. Cooperation — only 1,730 women are cooperated (11% of the total number of cooperatives). There are women in elective positions in cooperative institutions. L bodies of justice - members of the Nar. Com. Yust. Chuv-rep. — 2, judges — 1, Narzassedeli — 337. A number of women's appearances in courts as advocates. 4. Cultural enlightenment, the organization of artels, schools, etc. There are no rural women in Tsivilsky district — 4, in Batyrevsky — 2, Alatyrsky — 29, there is no information on other districts. Circles for the study of women's movement: Tsivilskoge u. — 7, in Batyrevsky u. — 2, in Alatyrsky u. — 6, in Cheboksary u. — 9. In Cheboksary u. there is a cutting and sewing school in the Marpo Garden. From 15 / 1 to 1 / Ш 1926 in Cheboksary, two-week republican courses for retraining workers among women of the Chechen SSR were held. There were 64 women in the course, of which 52 were Chuvash, 11 were Russian, and 1 was Tatar. Of these, party members — 1, candidates — 6, Komsomol — 19, non-party — 38; of them there were 29 delegates, members of the village council — I, members of the mutual aid committees — 6, women workers — 19, workers of the health centers — 1, heads of children — 1 and those who did not work in public organizations — 6. Lectures were delivered in Russian and Chuvash. 75% of those who attended the courses had a lower education or little literacy. Women were sent to various educational institutions in 1925 according to Tsivilsky district. in regional social and political schools of the first stage - 8; II degree — 3 women and 4 women at the workers' faculty; according to Batyrevsky u. to various educational institutions — 17 women and in Alatyr — 9 (but no information about other counties) .5. Protection of mothers and infants and health care (information 1924-25). Two homes for mothers and children (Cheboksary for 40 beds and Tsivilsk for 10 beds; a permanent type nursery: Cheboksary — 15 beds and Tsivilsk — 15 beds. In 1924 there were only 2 nurseries in the summer (in the village of Kukshuch, Yadrinsk ., for 10 beds of willow. Yal-gindine of the Cheboksary district for 20 beds, in the last 3 months 1,800 bed days have passed; In 1925 there were 3 nurseries for summer time in each county (12 nurseries in total). According to information from the beginning of 1926 In Tsivilsky uyezd 4 creches and 1 playground for children are mentioned, creches that worked in the summer time in Batyrevsky uyezd are mentioned, but their number is not indicated.In the same uyezd there are 2 orphanages. 3 crèches. Here we have 13 crèches in 3 counties. As already mentioned, there are no special maternity hospitals, but there are maternity beds at all hospitals. Fight against trachoma. The number of trachoma patients (information from the beginning of 1925): Ibresinsky per 110.000 inhabitants - 77.000-70%, Cheboksary district - 113.500-73.100-61.7%, Tsivilsky district - 173.400 - 70.100-39.3%, Yadrinsky district - 19 0.500—43.300—23% of the total of 587.400 — 263.500 patients, that is, 48.5%. In 1924, there were 63,826 eye diseases in total (of which 32,474 trachomas). Open eye offices in Cheboksary, Marposad and Ibresy. Special eye beds in Yadrin — 20, Kanash — 20, 3 trachomatous orphanages in Batyrev for 60 children and Aknosin for 58 children. Other measures (it is planned to open 5 eye hospitals and an eye surgery department at hospitals, the work of eye teams, etc.) was mentioned above. Posters and brochures have been posted to combat trachoma. The number of eye beds by 1925 was 234 (against 87 in 1921). Obviously, all these numbers should be increased for the present time, since work in all directions is vigorously developing. Even for 1925-26. they cannot cover the whole work. However, they provide excellent evidence of its significance. When writing the brochure, in addition to a number of pre-revolutionary publications, introducing the old way of life and personal observations, were used: 1. Petrova - "Chuvashia". GIZ, 1926 2. The magazine and newspaper "Life of Nationalities", a number of newspaper articles and correspondences, articles and notes in "Kommunist" and "Krestyanka" for different years. 3. Materials (reports, reports, digital data) of the Department of Workers and Peasant women of the Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party of Bolsheviks and the People's Commissar-Zdrava and other photographs belong to the Department. Slave. and Cr. Central Committee and Central Museum of Ethnology. Author.