1. Brief geographical overview of Tajikistan
Tajikistan is a country of mountains, one of the majestic mountainous countries of the whole world, located in the southeastern part of Central Asia and our Soviet Union. From the north, Tajikistan is limited by the Kara-Kirghiz Autonomous Region and the Uzbek SSR, from the east by China, from the south by Afghanistan and from the west by the territory of our Union, that is, the same Uzbek SSR. The largest part of Tajikistan's area is made up of mountain ranges with spurs and plateaus, between which there are few valleys. The mountain system of Tajikistan is the western spurs of the world's greatest upland, the Pamirs, which occupies the entire eastern part of the country and extends further beyond its borders. Mountain ranges go from East to West, gradually lowering and turning into hilly spurs. All these ridges are extremely difficult to pass. The passes are abundant, but mainly for pack traffic, and they are located at an altitude that sometimes reaches 2 versts. The tops of the mountain ranges are covered with snow and ice everywhere, and the slopes, steeper to the south and more sloping to the north, are occasionally covered with very poor shrub vegetation. In the eastern part of the country, tree vegetation is completely absent, as the area is replete with desert plateaus, rocky and sandy soil. The slopes of the mountains! Are usually dissected by deep gorges, along which stormy rivers rush with noise. The aforementioned torus chains, due to their difficult passability, since ancient times have served as a reliable protection for the Tajik people from any conquerors. As for the flat area, it makes up a very small percentage of the total area of ​​the country. The valleys of Tajikistan are covered with agricultural crops, partly swampy, partly occupied by vast thickets of giant reeds or sands. Mountain rivers, starting from massive glacial spaces or lakes located at an inaccessible height, rapidly rush downward, running now narrow, now wide valleys and in places diverge along artificial canals (irrigation ditches), irrigating agricultural! • fields, and sometimes at all. disappearing among them, without reaching the river or sea (r. Zerav-shan). The most prominent rivers in Tajikistan are the following: r. SurkhOb, Zeravshan, Kafir-nigan, Pyanj, etc. It is not hard to guess that with such a geological structure Tajikistan has valuable mineral deposits and springs, although, according to experts, this area has been geologically explored very little. It is interesting to note that in some places the hot mineral springs were here with a fountain and the soil is so hot that mutton can be freely baked in a dug hole covered with an iron sheet. All these riches are not used at all due to the country's backwardness. The climatic conditions of Tajikistan are quite consistent with its geological structure, but very rarely correspond to the geographical position of the country. Thus, being located at the same latitude as southern Italy, Tajikistan has an average winter temperature approximately equal to that of Holland (+ 2 ° C), and an average summer temperature equal to that of sowing. Africa (- | -40 ° C). “As the mountains rise, the climate becomes more severe and on the peaks, reaching 6 versts in places, it becomes close to the polar one. The average temperature in the Pamirs is lower, it is in the Arkhangelsk province. With regard to the surface conditions and climate, vegetation develops here. The flat areas of Tajikistan are occupied by steppe areas, wide reed thickets along the river banks and abundant orchards growing: peaches, apricots, grapes and other fruits. Mountain areas of moderate altitude differ from the plains by the presence of already forest lands and thickets of bushes (wild rose, barberry, etc.). Finally, the highest belt, in contact with glaciers, is strewn with only sparse grass (feather grass, wormwood) and low shrub vegetation. Of the cereals in Tajikistan, millet, barley and corn are widespread. The most common types of tree species here are: birch, poplar and juniper, the latter being an excellent construction material, convenient for fuel and coal. The vegetation of the country as a whole is extremely diverse and groups in itself various types of plants from subtropical to polar. The fauna of Tajikistan also reflected in itself all the originality of this typical mountainous country. In the highest places (Pamir region), a variety of feathered predators is striking, special breeds of which, such as: snow vultures, bearded vultures, etc., reign over these places and instill fear not only on herds, but also on a person who inadvertently found himself over steepness along the way. With the blows of its wings, the predator knocks its prey into the abyss and there it easily deals with it. Among the mammals of this region, a special breed of working cattle "Kutasy" and a large breed of sheep (with a white mane on the neck), reaching 15-20 poods, should be noted. weight.In low-lying places, the fauna is much richer and more diverse. There is an abundance of reptiles here: steppe boa constrictor, spectacle snake,mountain agama, etc. There are many! different species of birds, of which are interesting: the Zeravshan pheasant, the so-called "blue bird" and the green woodpecker. Mammals can be noted for the following rare species: the horned goat, the Amudarya deer, the Bukhara hyena, etc. In the river reed thickets, you can also find the tiger.In general, the geographical appearance of Tajikistan is very different from the adjacent territories of the Soviet Union, and in its geological structure is a world rarity in general. The sharp forms of the surface, with its dizzying abysses, sky-high heights, bubbling streams, a variety of climate, diversity of flora and fauna, have left their inevitable imprint on the life of the local population, on its economy, cultural level, everyday life and social order.

2. Administrative structure and national economy of the country.
Tajikistan, as an independent state organism, in the form of the Autonomous SS of the Republic, was formed at the end of 1924, making up part of the Uzbek SSR. Before the October Revolution, Tajikistan was administratively defeated between Turkestan and Bukhara. Tajikistan stood out as an independent state unit as a result of the national demarcation of Central Asia. , the resolution on which was unanimously passed at the congresses of the soviets b. Turkestan and Bukhara Sov. Republics and approved in the same year at the All-Russian and All-Union Congresses of Soviets. Pre-revolutionary Tajikistan, being mainly the territory of the Bukhara emir, was administratively divided into beks, headed by beks or local princes. These administrative units were at the same time tax-paying areas, since the entire agricultural mass of the population paid the emir to levy for the land. Bekstva divided the territory in relation to the economic features of the area and their borders in most cases coincided with the course of rivers. After the national demarcation of Central Asia, the Tajik Autonomous Sots. Sov. The republic is administratively divided into 8 wilay eto v, which roughly correspond in area to the counties of our central Russia. Each vilayet is divided into tumu, corresponding to the volosts, and the tumu fall into kents or villages (kishlaks), with an independent agricultural society in each. The vilayet region includes from 2 to 6 tumen; there are 35 tumen in all 8 vilayets of the republic. The capital of Tajikistan is mountains. Du-shambe, which is located in its western part and is a very insignificant group of poor native buildings, although with the formation of an administrative center here, any construction began to develop widely. It should be noted that the close connection of Tajikistan with Uzbekistan in geographical and administrative relations is mixed the composition of the population in cities and large villages caused in places abnormal phenomena of "Uzbekization" of the Tajik population in the points officially considered Uzbek. An intensified struggle is being waged against this, which has certain results in favor of the Tajiks. For example, the Kannibadam region of Uzbekistan, inhabited mainly by Tajiks, has now received autonomy, the Institute of Education in Tashkent, where mainly Tajiks study, has been transferred to the direct jurisdiction of the Tajik A.S. S. of the Republic, etc. The national economy of the country in Tajikistan has several peculiar forms, determined by its geographical features. Overall, Tajikistan is a typical agricultural country. High mountain villages of Tajiks are of the farm type and are characterized by a small number of households, with a large composition of families (13-15 people), moreover, family divisions, fragmentation of the economy are generally not typical for Tajikistan, if they occur, then only among the inhabitants valleys, but not mountainous regions. The higher the terrain, the less frequent the population, the more difficult the struggle with nature, the more amicable, therefore, it is united by the commonality of its economic interests. The aforementioned farmsteads are usually located along the sources of rivers. The villages along the middle reaches of the rivers and the middle upland of the country have a slightly different type. Here the land becomes more needed, thanks to the more abundant moisture and hot sun, more crowded population and therefore greater value. Hence, kishlaks are more extensive, with more closely adjoining buildings. In a word, the village begins to acquire the usual form of a mountain village - an aul, adhered to the slope of the ridge and is the most typical for Tajikistan in general. There is a tendency towards sections, that is, to be separated into independent farms. Families number 6-8 people. The very type of Tajik villages reveals the primitive state of the household and agriculture of the population. All the necessary funds for the economy are taken mainly from the surface of the earth, namely: buildings are made mainly of stone, housing is heated more often! total dried, pressed manure (m (dung) and brushwood, for lack of forest, eats the population mainly by products of agriculture, cattle breeding, hunting, etc., etc. The main areas of the local economy in Tajikistan are also closely dependent on the land surface and climatic conditions. In the highest region (Gorno-Badakhshan), hunting, dairy farming, and other non-agricultural trades are developed. Agriculture is widespread on the slopes of mountain ranges, however, here it is not the main source of subsistence, which is why the population is forced to engage in side trades: burning coal, collecting herbs for making paints, developing various household implements, etc. Inhabitants of the lowest regions, on the contrary, are mainly engaged in agriculture: rice, mulberry trees for the production of silk, fruit orchards, etc. In addition, sheep breeding is also practiced, but not to the same extent as in mountainous regions. The higher the terrain, the less sown area per person, but more livestock and vice versa. In the high mountainous areas, 100 people. of the population cultivate only 13 acres of crops, with livestock in 111 heads, while on the plains per 100 people there are 75 to 94 dess. sown area and only 50-65 head of livestock. Tajiks cultivate the land with a plow (aspor), a spade (belle) and a pick (kilyand). The grain is threshed with a special block (chapor), which the bull drags over the laid sheaves, and the cargo is transported even in summer on a special sleigh (chigina). A means of transportation, except for horses, is a special breed of cattle called "kutasy", on which all field work is carried out. In terms of their production, various types of agriculture in Tajikistan are in the following ratio: in the first place is field cultivation, which gives 75% of the total production, in the second place is horticulture, 10%, in the third livestock-8 ° / o, then viticulture, horticulture and poultry farming. On average, one person has an income of 28 rubles. per year, moreover, a tithe of land gives an income of 24 rubles. and a unit of livestock — 4 rubles. From these figures it is clear how insignificant the profitability of the working agricultural population of Tajikistan is and how poor this country is now. '' In addition to agriculture, mention should be made of the state of underground treasures, which, however, have been very little explored due to the peculiarities of the surface. It must be said that in Tajikistan there is a territory in the center of its eastern part, with an area of ​​approximately 3000 sq. kilometers, which until now has not been explored at all and does not have its own cartography. As for the discovered underground treasures, they do not differ in their size and present the following picture. In the river basin The Zeravshan and its tributaries have deposits of coal, approximately in the ZUg of a billion poods of the total reserve, in addition, coal seams have been observed in other places. Due to the difficulties of transportation, there is no normal exploitation, and at present coal is mined by the local population in a primitive way for personal consumption. For coal, in terms of their power, there are hot sulfur springs, located mainly near the Obi-Garm city, and, finally, gold mines can be attributed to the mining industries, which, however, should be understood in a very primitive sense. Gold is mined from river water (the Zeravshan River), which with its swift current lifts up golden circles, which are caught by trapping Them in the wool of spaced lamb skins. In addition to the listed treasures, there are deposits of lead, iron ore, ammonia and sulfur in Tajikistan. All this, however, was discovered in very small sizes. The extremely poor development of communication routes, the inconvenience of the surface and the remoteness from the cultural centers of Tajikistan, to a large extent determine the neglected state of its minerals, which could, under other conditions, be of great help to the needy population. The main factor of the economic well-being of any country, the communication routes, are here in a too unfavorable form, which is a significant obstacle to the economic growth of Tajikistan. Local communication routes are subdivided into unpaved and river ones, and the former, in turn, are divided into wheeled and pack routes. There are no railways in Tajikistan. The Guzar-Derbent-Dushambe-Faizabad highway is of paramount importance among wheel roads. The nearest railway station of the Central Asian railway. The village of "Guzar" is 266 versts from Dushambe. Both wheeled and pack roads in Tajikistan are very poor in bridges, which in most cases are not safe for crossing. Due to this state of the bridges, in the spring the floods of rivers completely stop the movement and therefore communication between settlements is interrupted in places. The rivers of Tajikistan are almost inaccessible for navigation, thanks to the many pitfalls that make traffic dangerous. Crossing them are practiced on rafts, and sometimes just by swimming.

3. Population, its social structure, occupation and life.
The main population of Tajikistan is the people, by whose name this country has now received its name, i.e. Tajiks, sos representing 65% of the total population. They are followed by Uzbeks and Turkmens, of which they account for up to 30%; finally, Kyrgyz, Arabs, Jews, Russians and representatives of other nationalities live here, the number of which is insignificant. Before the revolution, there were 1,294,000 people in Tajikistan. (according to the census of 1917), but at present the ego of quantities © has decreased by about one third. The reason for this circumstance was the massive resettlement to other regions and even abroad (to Afghanistan), due to the ruin of farms during the war and Basmachism. The south-western region suffered the most, where the population decreased by 60% against 30-40% of other regions. The Basmachi brought a lot of devastation and all kinds of disasters to Tajikistan. For three years this area represented an almost continuous battlefield, where the already meager national economy of the country was destroyed to the ground. In terms of its inner content, Basmachism represented a civil war between the reactionary elements of the country and the Soviet regime. Its main forces were the old feudal circles, the ulema, as well as the ignorant, fanatical element of the general population, whose political consciousness was awakening very slowly. The Emir of Bukhara, who owned the territory of Tajikistan before the revolution, united and inspired this movement from abroad, often using the services of British agents, Turkish officers and other foreign elements. The abstract pan-Islamist slogans of Basmachism were not clear to the broad peasant masses. The fight against him was carried out by combined military and social measures (clarification of the essence of the movement, the involvement of the population in Soviet construction, etc.), thanks to which the Basmachi were outlived. The total number of Tajiks is estimated at about 400 thousand people. In addition, they also live outside their republic, in the north. the eastern slope of the Himalayas and in Afghanistan, moreover, their number in the latter is much greater, even than in the USSR. Modern researchers consider Tajiks to be the most ancient inhabitants of Wed. Asia, which, only due to the geographical features of the country, have survived here in such numbers, while other representatives of the Iranian tribe, as a result of numerous conquests Cf. Asia, were exterminated or assimilated. Thus, modern Tajiks are descendants of the ancient Iranian element, once glorious for its culture. According to the areas of settlement and by their type, the Tajiks can be divided into mountainous and lowland. The latter, naturally, mingled more with their conquerors than the former, who sometimes retained the purest appearance of an Iranian-Aryan to this day. The great cultural past of their ancestors could not pass without a trace even for modern Tajiks, leaving its imprint on their character, appearance and everyday life. life. The Tajik certainly stands out among other peoples inhabiting the Wed. Asia. First of all, this is manifested in his stubborn diligence and thoughtful attitude to his farm. Even from those general information about the state of the national economy, which are given above, one can easily conclude what tremendous energy is required from a Tajik peasant to run his household in the face of such a difficult struggle with nature. In the city, a Tajik is as great a craftsman as a farmer in a village. Possessing a higher cultural level, the Tajik is less militant than the surrounding Turkic peoples. He is not withdrawn and loves social gatherings very much. In the winter, when field work stops, a kind of club associations (dzhura) are organized, which gather for conversations and rest in specially equipped rooms (chai-ha'ne). Even the poor mountaineers who go to winter work in cities or large villages gather here, as a rule, in their friendly community, arranging treats for a pool, and rest in the circle of fellow countrymen. At the mosques, special rooms are set up, called "alau-khane", where men gather around the fire, for a common meal, also composed on a collective basis. The characteristic features of the appearance of a Tajik are: medium height, strong muscular arms and legs, dark brown and sometimes gray eyes, dark blond hair and a proportional physique, without excessive obesity or thinness. There are, of course, other types, some resembling an Indian, others even similar to our Great Russian peasant. Very, characteristic is the manner of speaking slowly and walking slowly. With a calm, unhurried gait, a Tajik can walk all day through the mountains and gorges, without taking long breaks, and his endurance in this respect is simply amazing. The most common clothing of the prevailing agricultural population is the following: a light paper robe (yakta), which put on directly on the body, a rough belt (futa) encircling this robe, white pants (lo-winter), gathered in boots and rough work shoes (masi) out! rawhide in the form of boots. In winter, wears a quilted, and sometimes a sheepskin robe, knee length and belted. A gray paper bandage (turban) is wrapped around the head, or a simple skullcap is put on. Social stratification among the Tajiks is extremely insignificant, because, as mentioned above, this nationality is a predominantly agricultural, peasant mass, existing in an almost subsistence economy. True, Tajikistan knows a very prominent group of Tajik merchants, clergy, civil servants and other representatives of the urban population, but it is so insignificant in size that it is necessary to speak about it only in passing. According to the data of pre-revolutionary times, the urban population numbered only 55,000 people per 1.200.000 people of the rural population, i.e. about 5%. In percentage terms, the number of the urban population has now remained approximately the same, if not reduced. Cities here should be understood as trade, craft and administrative centers — that's all. True, there are three ginneries in Tajikistan, built last year, and one soap factory, which employs several dozen laborers. In addition, there is a fairly large number of out-work workers (20 thousand), but they are not yet united in any way. The "Koshchi" union, corresponding to the Vserabotzemles trade union, which has expanded its activities in Uzbekistan, does not work here yet. This is mainly due to the difficulty of uniting the workers according to the conditions of the area and, in addition, to the lack of material resources, although the need for; Therefore, if we talk about social stratification, then we should bear in mind only a small group of Tajik merchants who inhabit mainly the cities: Ura-Tyube, Gissar, Samarkand, Bukhara, Dushambe, etc., the agricultural nobility — shahs, worlds, beks, etc. — have long been swept away by the revolution. The life of a Tajik merchant, mullah or other representative of the urban population, first of all, is not at all characteristic of the Tajik nationality. This is explained by the fact that such an element was almost completely assimilated with the Uzbeks. Suffice it to point out as an illustration that the urban Tajiks of Uzbekistan teach their children not in their native language, but in the Uzbek dialect, while the inhabitants of the cities of Tajikistan naturally gravitate towards their Uzbek brothers, due to their common interests. The urban family has a spirit of extraordinary routine and slavish adherence to old religious traditions, which cannot be noticed to such an extent among the population of the village. Here we see a characteristic group of farm laborers, which in most cases is made up of the village poor, who give themselves up for a certain period at the complete disposal of the owner. The farm laborer goes after the horse, serves the guests in the male part of the house and does all the black! work, moreover, does not receive any salary, but lives on! the maintenance of the owner, occasionally acquiring gifts in the form of money or cuts of the manufacture. Having made a little money for himself, received from the owner, and sometimes "tea" from the guests, with the end of the term of employment, he mounts a donkey and travels far into the mountains to his Fig. 2. Dwelling of a mountain Tajik family. Due to the above circumstances, when describing the life of a Tajik, his occupations and cultural level, we will adhere to the Tajik farmer, as the type of the most characteristic and widespread! The dwelling of a mountain Tajik is a very simple and pitiful structure: The flat roofs of small huts are overgrown with grass and the dark walls sometimes twisted sideways. Wicker fences coated with clay look very sad. The walls of the hut are made about 3 arshins high from small stones, also covered with clay mixed with straw. There are no okoi, there are one or two holes that serve both for light and smoke. The roof is made of thin beams, on which brushwood is applied, and all this is abundantly smeared with clay, and, at the top, another hole is left for smoke. The entrance is through one door, which is locked from the inside on a turntable. Around the house there is a courtyard surrounded by a palisade or a wattle fence coated with clay. The dwelling of a flat Tajik has a completely different picture. It is spacious and high, built of bricks, cleaned up and painted with various patterns. All around there are buildings, vegetable gardens, and sometimes gardens. Inside the walls are adobe hills for sleeping. A lamp is stuck in the wall, that is, a rod coated with some kind of combustible substance. Along the elevations along the walls, goatskin or sheep skins lie in steles. Fire is carved from flint (chamok) with flint. This is the home of a Tajik. Of course, it has significant shortcomings, and above all, dampness and drafts, these inevitable companions of any poor home, spreading pulmonary diseases and rheumatism. It must be said that in some villages for the winter seern special premises are being built by collective efforts, in which several families live at the same time. These are actually the same buildings, but with thicker walls and a roof. As we already know, Tajiks have been farmers from time immemorial, and they categorically avoid invasions of land use. Grain plants are sown here: wheat, barley and millet, as well as peas, beans and in some places corn, sunflowers are planted, cotton and so on. The communal ownership of land is completely unknown here and the Tajik is the complete owner of his own plot, with the exception of pastures, where, however, by inheritance, everyone has his own plot in use. Cotton growing is of great importance in the life of some regions (Pyanj). Cotton here almost completely replaces cereals, and every house has its own cotton farm. Residents not only pick cotton, but also produce various fabrics from it in an artisanal way. Everywhere there is a loom, which is used to produce the paper material “mata”, which is popular among Tajiks. Weaving is usually done in winter, when field work and cattle grazing cease. In addition to field cultivation and cotton growing, the inhabitants of Pavnin are engaged in gardening and sericulture. Dried apples are used by Tajiks not only in their whole form, but also ground into flour. Grinding of mulberry fruit is especially common. The latter is also divorced for its intended purpose, i.e. for the purpose of sericulture. Unfortunately, the production of silk is so primitive that the fabrics come out extremely rough. However, the shortage in the production of silk fabrics is covered by the high art of embroidery with multicolored silk threads, widespread among the population, which in some places achieves amazing success. Finally, it is necessary to dwell on another important branch of Tajik agriculture - cattle breeding. The vast mountain pastures of Tajikistan have always contributed to the development of this ancient type of economy here. The vast majority of livestock in Tajikistan are cattle, which are used for both food and labor. With the onset of warm spring days, the owner of the herd usually leaves his village and goes to look for pasture, where he builds an unpretentious hut and remains in the bosom of nature until the onset of cold days. Milk and sour cream are the staple foods in every family, while wool and leather go to fabrics and shoes. The listed occupations, however, do not fully provide for the Tajik mountaineers, and therefore latrines are common. In the fall, when the field work ends, the mountaineers go to. the nearest large cities: Samarkand, Tashkent, Pend-Zhakend, etc., where they are usually hired for the dirtiest and most difficult work: they dig wells, carry weights, guard shops, houses, etc. at night, and sometimes, as indicated, they simply enter servants to wealthy townspeople. Religious beliefs of Tajiks are very simple and do not differ at all with the fanaticism that can be found among other inhabitants of the mountains; By their religion, they are Sunni Muslims, but among them there are adherents of one of the Muslim sects, Ishmaelism, who live mainly along the Panju River. Their number, however, is not great. The overwhelming majority of Tajiks, settled in mountain villages, retained along with Islam their old pre-Islamic beliefs. They believe in good and evil spirits. The first are called "maidens" or "divas" and live in the mountains, in the form of a gigantic man with a terrible face. From the blow of the diva with his fist on the ground, all sorts of rock-rolls occur, sometimes destroying entire villages. Divas guard gold, silver in grains and can bring various disasters to a person. To prevent themselves from the intrigues of divas, Tajiks' wear a talisman, i.e. yo. a simple piece of paper with the inscription: "bismillahir-rahmanir-rahimi", that is, "In the name of the Lord, the merciful, the merciful", which is folded into the shape of a triangle. Good spirits are called in some places "firishtya", in some "bets" and have the appearance of a beautiful * woman who protects a person from any danger if he leads a virtuous life. In its purest form, Islam is practiced in large cities, where the population was under the influence of a vast spiritual class and is often distinguished by significant fanaticism. The deeper into the mountains, the weaker the beliefs of Islam, the less it left its imprint on the life of a Tajik. However, Tajiks have long been Muslims, and it must be admitted that the influence of Islam on the life of this nation as a whole, as well as on the life of each family separately, has its enormous concrete consequences, which are primarily reflected in the position of a Tajik woman.
4. The position of a Tajik woman before the October Revolution.
So, Islam has left its heavy centuries-old imprint on the entire life of a Tajik woman, who, however, enjoys much greater freedom in the mountains than in the city. Here they do not wrap her up in various robes and bedspreads, do not imprison her from the gaze of strangers in a cramped and stuffy room, as is usually observed among the sanctimonious bourgeois population of cities. In a mountain village, a woman wears a veil '(chishban) only for the parade, on holidays and especially solemn occasions, and at normal times she walks without any veil, moreover, communication with men is not considered such a shame here as in the city. You can often see a group of women sitting at the hut together with men, between whom there is a lively conversation, laughter and jokes are heard. So comparatively open! the life of a Tajik woman sometimes allows her to marry, not only at the behest of her father, but also at her own request. This is the only and enormous advantage of a Tajik woman, which she had in the past and has not lost now, unlike the lives of other Muslim women. Marriage among Tajiks occurs very early, as elsewhere in general in the East. The girl is given in marriage from the age of 12 to> 25 years of age, after which; she already has a chance; for marriage does not. Having looked at the bride for himself, the groom sends her matchmaker, his mother or sister to her parents, who from afar starts talking about marriage, and if consent to such follows, a discussion of the question of "kalym" begins, that is, redemption of the groom for the bride. Thus, the dowry is prepared here not only by the bride, but also by the groom. Usually, part of the bride's dowry is made by her father, and most of it is supplied by the groom. In total, it consists of the following items: shirts - 10-15 pcs., Trousers - 10-15 pcs., Scarves - 10-15 pcs., Robes - 5-10 pcs., Blankets - 2-3 pcs., Pillows - 2-4 pcs. Then, there are various decorations and so on. little things, only about 200-300 rubles. Very often the dowry includes various livestock, dishes, a gun, etc. Kalym is made up of one or more horses, cows, rams, a varied amount of mats, shirts, wheat, etc. A deadline for paying the kalym is set and the wedding takes place on the same day. The groom comes to the bride's house with the mullah and the village foreman. Mulla reads a series of prayers after. which, having inquired about the consent to the marriage of the bride and groom, reveals whom he married. This usually ends the marriage ceremony. After the ceremony, the bride goes to the groom's house, and in the bride's house there are treats and all kinds of entertainment, moreover, women usually gather in a room separate from men. The next day, in the case of the bride's innocence, she is congratulated and covered with all sorts of tenderness, otherwise, a divorce is required and only occasionally the wife stays with her husband, being hateful for him for life. It is interesting to note another, no less important, event in the life of a Tajik woman - the birth of a child and that extraordinary attitude towards children among Tajiks in general, which is known to everyone who came into contact with them. Children for the native woman of Tajikistan are considered a great reward for her entire working life. So looks; almost every Tajik woman loves her children. Love for her child and the desire to have him are so great that when a woman is pregnant, she secretly goes to the mullah and asks him to do all sorts of spells to ensure a safe childbirth and health of the child. True, this happens in cases where children of a Tajik woman die. The birth of a child occurs in this way. Before giving birth, a Tajik woman says goodbye to all her relatives and remains in a separate room alone with her grandmother. Sometimes one or two older women are present. When the last labor pains begin, the woman is placed at a stool on which she rests with her hands and in this position gives birth to a child. It is believed that if a child appears screaming, then he will be happy throughout his life. After giving birth, the newborn is wrapped in a piece of soft "mat" and placed in a homemade rocking chair, and the woman in labor is placed in bed. To strengthen her strength, they give her lard or melted butter to drink and during the first days no one is allowed to see her. Caring for a child is the most important task for a Tajik woman, for which she sacrifices all her strength. She will never agree, a woman will leave her child even at home in the hands of strangers. During work, she drags the cradle with her newborn everywhere with her. It should be noted that childbirth for a Tajik woman generally takes place in very difficult and sometimes unsanitary conditions. After marriage, a relatively carefree life for a woman ends and a difficult existence begins in slavery with her husband. This life is not fun and monotonous. Where seclusion exists, it is extremely slow and monotonous. Day after day, there is nowhere to rush, there is nothing new and good to expect from tomorrow. They get up, as a rule, early ', because of the cattle. We need to milk the cows and drive the cattle into the herd. Women are engaged in this, and girls collect dung and make dung from it. There is little firebox in Tajikistan, and therefore manure is collected not only from the yard, but also from the roadways, where girls are sent for it. In winter, manure is not removed from the cattle, but left in place, sprinkled with straw or dry foliage. After the cattle are harvested, cakes (kuturma) are baked and this is the whole family breakfast. The husband goes to work in the field, where he spends almost the whole day. The women stay at home alone and do all sorts of household chores: chinning old clothes, sewing new ones, embroidering, spinning, weaving, etc. The work is usually done very slowly, and even slower if a neighbor or relative comes. For the guest, cakes and tea are served, where there is one, and the time is spent B) various chatter and gossip, and they do not leave work. They usually come to pass the time under the pretext of asking something about the housework, but disappear from a friend for several hours. But this is not considered "visiting". The whole family comes to visit, with children and work, sitting until> evening, so that the hostess can prepare some kind of treat for the guests. The winter time is somewhat more varied than the summer one, because it is the time of weddings and relaxation from field work. Annual holidays are also significant gaps in the gloomy life of a Tajik woman. It should be noted that for a man these are working days, but for a woman the most free and free time. On the eve of such holidays, a Tajik woman washes her head, braids finely braids, and on the day of the holiday greases her eyebrows (with soot or black paint), and, dressed in variegated clothes, goes to where the tambourine sounds, namely: in winter to one of the houses of the village, and in summer , most often, to its outskirts. The celebration lasts 2-3 days. Songs, dances, jokes, bragging about outfits entertain a Tajik woman for a while from her boring everyday life, IO 'most of all the holiday pleases a Tajik woman by the fact that on this day she is allowed some freedom by custom, so they have fun for a long time, as if wishing to make fuller use of Fleeting freedom ... On such holidays, the groom can see his bride, hiding somewhere behind a bush or building and bribing one of the women with sweets, which will push the unsuspecting bride into a common dance. In addition to annual holidays, Tajik women also have fun during spring gatherings of various herbs. Such fees also turn into real holidays associated with appropriate costumes and pastime. Regarding female labor in the general household of the family, it must be said that it is very significant. It is difficult to determine what percentage of this is the work of a Tajik woman, but in any case, a lot of it falls to her share. A Tajik woman cooks food, spins, sews, weaves, embroiders, runs all dairy and livestock farming 'and helps her husband in the garden or vegetable garden. The female population of high-mountain villages, living in conditions much freer than the population of low-lying areas, is employed and in other types of work that are completely beyond the reach of a plain woman Here, Tojichka widely uses her labor in field farming and cattle breeding. She threshes and blows bread, collects grain and straw, and sometimes carries on shepherd's duties. When warm days come, women unite in an artel, gather their cattle and drive them to pastures, where they build themselves large huts for the summer and stay there with their children until autumn. Freedom here also affects the fact that in some places the custom has been preserved, according to which men are not allowed into such shepherd colonies, as long as they are in the field. (In general, in Tajikistan, the role of women in the economy is limited and determined by the rules of Islam, according to which she not all work is allowed, namely, it is forbidden to work in public, so that she cannot run into a stranger. This rule, as I see, is not always observed, especially where the influence of Islam is weakened. Nevertheless, thanks to this centuries-old To the influence of Islam, the activity of a Tajik woman has generally spilled over into the forms of housework, the most common of which are the following: 1) Spinning cotton kata on a spinning wheel. Almost every woman knows how to spin, and in every home you can see a spinning wheel, which is sometimes purchased as a wedding gift, and sometimes just bought. Quite often girls who collect for their dowry or poor single women take this work to order, and their daily earnings in such cases usually reach 20-30 kopecks. 2) The next, very widespread craft is weaving mats, i.e. e. coarse white cotton fabric, which is the most common in the household of a Tajik woman and is used for shirts, wide trousers, children's clothes, as well as blankets, robes, etc. This craft is practiced in the most primitive form, which has been inherited by Tajiks for many centuries. 3} Processing of paper yarn. The threads are wound on the same spinning wheel into skeins and boiled in water, after which they are dried and painted in different colors. Paints are most often used locally, and have : black, from a decoction of pomegranate peel and brown, from a decoction of cotton shells. Imported, aniline (red and blue) are also used, but this is not observed everywhere. After dyeing, the threads are crimson, by soaking them in a liquid diluted solution of flour, dried and wound on special spools for a loom.! 4) The weaving is made on a very simple loom, which is made by a joiner, usually in the same area. This occupation is very difficult in itself, which is complicated by the fact that the threads are produced fragile and often break. The weavers work, as usual, on the fresh; air, sitting on the ground and dangling his legs into a specially dug hole. The fabric is measured with a special measure of length called "gas" and is equal to 4 yards. If the work is not done for oneself, then a payment is charged for it in the amount of 4-5 gases from every 20 gases of the tissue, or in money, at the market value of the due amount of matter, which is usually equal to Gr. 50 kopecks, 5) Small farms about. Each house has at least one cow, and quite often several, but not much milk is collected. If a cow gives 5 bottles a day, she is considered good. In view of this, milk is mainly used for personal consumption, moreover, butter is rarely made, and sour cream is used more, from which the Tajik woman prepares her favorite national dishes "tarpukh" and "cool". 6) Wool processing. In view of the fact that each farm has a significant number of small ruminants, the Tajik hostess collects a sufficient supply of wool, from which coarse threads are spun and the ropes necessary in every farm are twisted. Good lamb's wool is used for woolen fabrics, and goat's wool is used for coarser items like ropes and other household items. Lamb wool is spun, like cotton wool, on a spinning wheel, and the threads are also dyed in various colors. If the work is in a hurry, then the yarn is often distributed to friends and relatives, who spin it completely free of charge, for the sake of helping their fellow villager. In addition to the listed types of women's craft, embroidery is also very common. This occupation is developed because it is required for any dowry. They embroider with multi-colored silk and paper threads, and the patterns are made by special specialists in this business, who often have high skill, who are invited to the house; where the fabrics are embroidered. Embroidery of Tajik women is known for its beautiful designs and subtlety of execution. The participation of Tajik women in field work is not very significant. The man plows, sows and reaps, but in the gardens and orchards, women carry most of the work. The man makes the beds, and the woman is responsible for planting seeds, watering, weeding and selling the crop. In the garden, she cuts grapes, removes apples, apricots and dries them for the winter. Drying of fruits is usually done on the roof. -, It still remains to say a few words about poultry farming. Oddly enough, perhaps, but it is very poorly developed. There are not many chickens here, and eggs are considered more of a delicacy than an ordinary product. The care of the chickens is very careless “, they are hardly fed, they are always expelled to pasture. Most of the girls look after the bird on the farm.! All products of women's labor go to the family's personal consumption. Despite the fact that weaving is very developed in places, "bazaars never see enough handicraft fabrics. Exactly the same is the case with other crafts. This is explained by the fact that the village is generally very little involved in the country's economic turnover. Therefore, the products of female labor are regarded extremely low. Thus, the position of a Tajik woman, mainly urban, was entirely determined by the Koran, Sharia and custom. She was a kind of movable property of her husband. At the wedding, the husband, as it were, bought himself a life partner, and became a complete master of her.According to the law of Islam, a girl has no right to an independent choice of her husband and parents, often, having married their daughter as an infant, marry her completely 'regardless of' her personal desire. Yes, this is impossible from the point of view of prevailing customs. In the city, choosing a husband is considered a shame and therefore the girl is most afraid of how they did not think of her that she was "choosing a husband for herself." Every man can divorce his wife without any difficulty, it is clear to her that she is divorced, whereas it is almost impossible for a woman to divorce her husband, since this requires the consent of her husband according to the law, and, according to custom, a large ransom for the latter. Often the husband demands an unbearable ransom and the wife, unable to pay it, is often forced into a shameful, bitter life full of all sorts of insults. However, the most powerful factors in the enslavement of a woman are the following. 1) No mother is the guardian of her children. In case of divorce, the children are not given to her. .This rule is based on religious and everyday traditions. Nothing is harder for a mother than to part with a baby, accepting into account, moreover, the extraordinary love of the Tajiks for children), therefore, no matter how bad a woman's life may be, she is unable to leave her husband. This custom is one of the most cruel methods of enslavement. 2) An equally important condition for the domestic enslavement of women is also the right to polygamy among men. It must be said that this custom is more widespread in cities, but it is occasionally found in villages, among the wealthier population. Where there are two or more wives, there is always the most beloved and therefore there cannot be peace. The husband 'always supports this latter in every possible way and remains incredibly rude towards the other, often beating her and relegating her to the position of a domestic slave. 3) Finally, another factor in the enslavement of women is the custom of marrying minors. The normal age for a girl to marry is 14-15 years. Very often a girl is wooed when she is born and is married off to a pre-puberty. If we add to this the girl’s complete powerlessness in deciding the issue of marriage, it becomes obvious how terrible her situation is under such barbaric laws and customs. There are times when a woman loses the strength to endure in the future all the oppression of her lawlessness and decides to commit suicide. Then she goes to the mountains, climbs a steep slope, covers her face with a veil and throws herself down into an abyss or into a bubbling river. These factors of age-old enslavement of a Tajik woman are the main reasons for her cultural backwardness, which is so. it is difficult to wage a struggle between the Soviet government and the Communist Party.
5. Legal cultural achievements of Tajik women in the Soviet Union.
The changes in the life of a Tajik woman caused by the October Revolution, of course, do not, of course, exhaust the tasks facing the Soviet government in emancipating women from age-old slavery. Let's start with the economic conditions of existence of a Tajik woman. In this respect, if there are changes, they were expressed only in the development of some crafts and the decline of others. This phenomenon is due to the general economic disruption in the villages, as a result of the civil war and Basmachism, which is only now beginning to get rid of with the implementation of the national demarcation of Central Asia. So, for example, in the years of high prices, handicraft cotton production, which was the exclusive occupation of women, developed very much. Everywhere they began to spin, weave, dye their popular mat, and the wages of women in this craft increased. But, on the other hand, embroidery, for example, which has always flourished, has significantly decreased, since in the conditions of the economic crisis it constitutes a kind of luxury in a woman's everyday life. Perhaps, the economic changes that took place in the life of a Tajik woman shortly after the October Revolution are limited to such phenomena. We now turn to the terms of the legal order. There are many more achievements here. Soviet legislation, to be sure, to a very insignificant extent still leaked into the inaccessible mountains of Adjikistan, but a huge cultural shift is already evident. Of course, in some places there are only vague rumors that now it is no longer possible to have many wives, that in case of divorce, the husband has no right to demand ransom from his wife, but rumors! these prompts a woman to check them in difficult times: the minute she receives in this case a proper explanation and protection of all her rights. Men, especially the faithful, of course, are very hostile to all these legal and cultural undertakings among women, and therefore they are in no hurry to implement them. However, Soviet legislation has already won solid ground in Tajikistan and, above all, this applies to the field of marriage. 1) In order for a marriage relationship to have all legal rights, a marriage is registered with the executive committee, moreover, for its conclusion, a certificate of attainment of marriageable age is required. about the absence of any obstacles to marriage at all. This circumstance prompts women to inevitably use this legal order, although, of course, they meet obstacles on the way to their rights from everywhere. 2) Soviet law prohibits polygamy. In this respect, there is also a significant shift in favor of women. The number of such marriages is gradually starting to decrease. Although it is practiced, entering into another marriage, it is mainly in cities and, at the same time, this custom is already becoming obsolete in the eyes of the population and losing ground. With regard to the law on divorce, there was a case (in Shahristan) when: one woman dared to initiate a divorce case in court and achieved a decision in her favor. This incident was of tremendous importance in the eyes of the population and, above all, in the eyes of women. He showed them that the fabulous rumors about women's freedom, which shyly circulate among the inhabitants of the villages, are not fiction at all, but a living reality, and that Soviet law broadly protects a woman from her centuries-old enslavement. However, it is necessary to note the obstacles that lie in the way of a Tajik woman to the exercise of her rights. First of all, a woman is connected by the distance to courts and administrative centers, which are located mainly in cities. A woman cannot leave the house, sit on a donkey or a horse and go far into the city, bother about a personal matter. This is completely unacceptable in her own eyes and in the eyes of the entire population of the village, due to the way of life, which was mentioned above. The second obstacle is fear of public opinion. A Tajik woman who dared to seek her most vital rights, even when her position turned out to be really hopeless, still cannot count on the approval of her deed from the local residents. The same friends, constant interlocutors and sad women, even her relatives, having learned about such an act, are unable to reconcile with him and leave the "crime" of their unfortunate fellow villager without publicity and censure. Such acts are covered with shame, which for a century defiles the reputation of an honest Tajik woman in the village. The usual motives for acquiring a second and third wife, during the life of the first, * are complaints that. "She does not give birth," that "she is sick," and so on, etc. So! Thus, there are still many obstacles to the complete conquest of her rights by a Tajik woman, and they are very serious, since they lie in the peculiarities of her age-old way of life and those shortcomings of the still young Soviet apparatus, which has been built since the formation of the national republics. The elimination of the age-old ignorance, which was so favorably supported before the revolution among the Eastern peoples, will cause the only true and a crushing blow to all kinds of obstacles to the emancipation of women in the Soviet East. The question of this is one of the main issues of Sovietization of the East and a powerful factor in establishing a strong connection with the national liberation movement in the countries of the foreign East. The Soviet government applies all measures in this direction, both economic and legal, as well as those directly related to the life of a working woman. In the economic field, agriculture is supported, industrial centers are being planted, artisanal and agricultural artels are developing, which can give a woman powerful support in her aspirations for material independence, in the legal field, the laws on marriage, guardianship, and the right to work are already mentioned. , education, etc. Proven methods of mass work among Tajik women are women's clubs and delegate meetings. Both those and others serve as the best organizers of the most backward female masses and the best conductor of a new way of life. As a result of this work of the Soviet authorities in Tajikistan, there are already cases when a woman has a salary higher than her husband, even has the opportunity to make gifts on her own (which was previously observed as a rare phenomenon only in remote mountainous regions), and thereby expands her influence in the family and strengthens its material independence. The so-called dairy artels, widespread in Tajikistan, can provide good support to agricultural associations. Due to the fact that the field economy is poorly developed; Often there is not enough feed and it is difficult to collect dairy products in quantities exceeding personal consumption, Tajik women are united in dairy artels. The latter's task is to save up the necessary dairy products for the farm, such as butter, sour cream, cheese, etc. For this purpose, the members of the artel transfer all their daily milk yield to some one housewife, of course, also to a member of the artel, and the latter, having received more milk than is needed for her family's consumption, prepares from it the products necessary for her, which she can sell. Thus, a circular alternation occurs. These artels include, usually, from 5 to 15 people. In mountainous areas, there is a wide participation of Tajik women in field work and in cattle breeding. Often, women retire with their children and cattle to pastures, living there the whole summer in separate female colonies. Men, busy with their own work in the village, only rarely go to visit their families. All these customs can play an enormous role in the emancipation of the Tajik woman, no less than the centers of industry that are being planted in some places. Of course, there is no doubt that direct cultural and educational work among women remains in the first place, and in this respect there are already significant gains. 4 women's clubs were organized: 1) in Dushamba, where a new building was built for the club at the expense of the Tajik Revolutionary Committee. At the club, a children's consultation, a women's outpatient clinic and, in addition, an artel are being created. This club is gaining considerable authority in the eyes of the population, and women are already starting to go there. 2) In Ura-Tyube, a women's club was organized with the participation of women members of the CP (b) of Uzbekistan in May 1925. This club also has a women's outpatient clinic, but Fig. 3. School for the eradication of illiteracy. The premises are so crowded that it does not accommodate everyone who wants to participate in the club, schools for the eradication of illiteracy and a school for girls have been opened. 3) In Panjakent, a club was recently organized with the direct participation of representatives of the women's department of the Central Committee of the Communist Party (Bolsheviks) of Uzbekistan, both in the matter of finding premises and in material terms. 4) The club in the Pamirs was organized in the spring of 1924, now it is additionally equipped. The only literate Tajik woman in the Pamirs was recruited to work there. funds of the Tajik Revolutionary Committee. At the club, a children's consultation, a women's outpatient clinic and, in addition, an artel are being created. This club is gaining considerable authority in the eyes of the population, and women are already starting to go there. 2) In Ura-Tyube, a women's club was organized with the participation of women members of the CP (b) of Uzbekistan in May 1925. This club also has a women's outpatient clinic, but Fig. 3. School for the eradication of illiteracy. The premises are so crowded that it does not accommodate everyone who wants to participate in the club, schools for the eradication of illiteracy and a school for girls have been opened. 3) In Panjakent, a club was recently organized with the direct participation of representatives of the women's department of the Central Committee of the Communist Party (Bolsheviks) of Uzbekistan, both in the matter of finding premises and in material terms. 4) The club in the Pamirs was organized in the spring of 1924, now it is additionally equipped. The only literate Tajik woman in the Pamirs was recruited to work there. Around the clubs there is a continuous struggle: women defending their equality on the one hand and the reactionary element on the other. In the conditions of this struggle, a Tajik woman has to build her new way of life and with great difficulties approach her goal. Emancipation of women it takes other forms as well. Under the central Soviet bodies, special women's commissions have been formed that fight for women's rights and involve Tajik women in public work. The activities of these commissions are mainly aimed at labor protection. In general, the women of Tajikistan are quite successfully involved in Soviet work. In the Pamirs, at the Congress of Soviets, for example, 4 women took part, and one of them now works in the Volost Executive Committee. According to Hurray: - Up to 10 women have been elected to the councils of Tyu-bin vilayet. Primary schools for girls and women have been opened in Dushamba, Ura-Tyube, Panjakent and the Pamirs. It is absolutely necessary to apply the methods of work among women to the peculiarities of local life, for * a survey of the life of Tajik women showed that the conditions surrounding a woman in high-mountainous areas and on the plains are completely different. two years ago, immediately after the national demarcation and before them, first of all, the question arose about the methods of work. It was recognized that the best means of emancipating Tajik women should be household innovations that could directly show a woman the full fruitfulness of Soviet construction. And this point of view turned out to be absolutely correct. The work of women's departments unfolded throughout Tajikistan. In Dushamba, the head of the women's department is an experienced worker in the conditions of Uzbekistan, who speaks the Tajik language. In Panjakent, the head of the women's department is a Russian, but fluent in the Uzbek and Tajik languages, who graduated from courses to train teachers for the elimination of illiteracy. In order to expand the still small contingent of workers, in Samarkand from-Rice. 4. Abdu Azizova, a member of the Central Executive Committee of the Uzbek SSR. A pedagogical school is open for Tajik women, which has been expanded to 75 students and is currently equipped with the best forces. This year, the composition of students will be increased to 100 people. A club and a nursery are organized at pedtech-nikum. Work is also carried out through constant correspondence with places, sending circulars and sending instructors. The Uzbek SSR is inhabited by Tajiks and other areas (Khojent, etc.), here, too, work among women is carried out in all forms and in compliance with the necessary condition — application to the peculiarities of the area. At party committees there are women's departments, clubs with schools at them are organized, women's artels, women's shops, etc. are opened. An examination is carried out as needed. The main disadvantage for working among women in Tajikistan is the lack of a sufficient number of female workers from among the Tajik women themselves, but the measures taken by the women's departments should soon make things easier in this regard. Throughout the work of women's departments in Central Asia and in Tajikistan, in particular, the latter had to to wage a stubborn struggle for the emancipation and involvement of women in Soviet work. This struggle has been crowned with great achievements in recent years. We know that thousands of Uzbeks, Tajiks and women of other nationalities have thrown off their traditional veils and started social and state building. Representatives of the highest union bodies have already emerged from their ranks, thus confirming the great successes of women of the Soviet East in the struggle for their emancipation. The Komsomol and pioneer detachments play an important role in this struggle. True, the participation of girls in these organizations is still very small (only 1% of the indigenous population of Uzbekistan is 1% of the members of the KSM), nevertheless, they are a good campaign tool for young people. The undoubted successes of Soviet work among the women of Tajikistan are clear to everyone. Tajik women throw off "chishbans", go to clubs, join the ranks of the party, study in schools and, returning to their villages, are energetically working for a new way of life. These successes, achieved in some 2-3 years, testify to the imminent emancipation of women in Tajikistan, in all its social strata and regions. In conclusion to the stated O1 life of a Tajik woman, it should be noted that the traditions of the Muslim worldview, which dominate and now predominantly among the urban population of Tajikistan, serve as the reason for the at times inert, mistrustful attitude, on the part of the bearers of these traditions, to all cultural and legal measures of the Soviet government, since they are directed. In the direction of the emancipation of women and the involvement of the latter in public and state work. Common arguments against cultural and legal measures among women are the views that women are widespread in such an environment as a being completely incapable of any cultural progress. In response to this, it is interesting to cite a few examples characterizing the struggle for the liberation of a working woman in India, who, like a Tajik woman, experienced the oppression of centuries of lawlessness. The most prominent fighters for the national liberation of India are like nair. Gandhi, Boz, and others openly declared that the merit of the working woman of India in the national liberation struggle is of great importance. Such statements are fully true. From the numerous literature on our revolutionary movement in India, you can * learn that the woman / has a huge role in it, namely: she participates in agitation, in raising funds for the national fund, in boycotting foreign goods and yr. In addition, India has a significant cadre of women instructors who are sent to remote corners of their homeland and organize the masses of workers and peasants there, open primary schools, arrange arbitration courts, and even recruit volunteers to military detachments. Howl this is not only to the local woman's strength, but she sometimes does it with such energy and skill that leave behind the work of a man. That's why one of the leaders of the nat. the liberation movement of India S. Woz said: “Our progress as a nation is closely dependent on the progress of our women. Currently, women's education is acquiring tremendous importance, in view of the fact that the close, joint life of patriarchal families is rapidly disappearing under the influence of economic reasons, and large families are fragmented into small ones. Under modern conditions, women learn to be independent, and not to remain prisoners within four walls. " These words of the tried and tested Indian politician can be the best example against those ideas about the uselessness of the cultural and educational emancipation of women, which are rooted to this day in the broad working masses of Tajikistan. Knowledge, cultural growth and useful creative activities of a Tajik woman in her society and state are equally available to her, as to all working women of the Soviet Union, if only they themselves took part in * emancipating themselves from / century-old slavery, for building (New life, in close family with other eastern peoples.
