Kurds General outline
Kurds live on the territory of five states. In the USSR, they occupy part of Armenia and Azerbaijan; in Persia, the western border regions of Kermanshah, Senna and Lake Umi, and in addition, there are Kurdish colonies in Khorasan, where they were resettled in the 16th century. There are about a million Kurds in Persia. In Turkey, Kurds occupy the southeastern provinces (vilayets: Di-arbekir, Van, Bitlis, Erzurum, etc.); in total there are Kurds to PD millions. The Persian and Turkish Kurds, as it were, encircle the Soviet republics of Armenia, Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan. Finally, in Iraq, in the Mosul vilayet, there are up to 450 thousand Kurds and in Syria, in the Aleppo region, there are up to 100 thousand. There are up to 300 million Kurds in total, and this figure is> approximate, in the absence of accurate statistics. Due to their scattering over the territories of several states, the Kurds do not represent a politically united people, although they live in approximately the same way of life, speak different dialects of the same language and very slowly merge with the surrounding peoples. The Kurds occupied their mountains several centuries before our era. ... But since ancient times they have lost their independence and have always been part of some eastern empire: Assyrian, Persian, Parthian, Roman, Arab, Mongolian and, finally, from the beginning of the 16th century. Turkish The whole life of the Kurds is filled with the struggle with the central authorities of these states for their independence. Having annexed Kurdistan in 1514, the Turks established themselves here only in 1834; however, even after this, huge uprisings against the central government do not stop, of which the largest, led by Sheikh Obei-Dulla, was in 1880. 'The patriarchal clan life of the Kurds puts in the first place the feudal chief of the tribe, who plays an exceptional role in the life of his tribe and kind. The most authoritative of the Kurdish feudal lords managed to unite the Kurdish tribes around themselves and raise them, of course, in their own interests and to defend their feudal rights and privileges, to fight the central government (Turkish and Persian). Along with such reactionary activities of the Kurdish feudal lords, approximately, since the beginning of the 20th century, the activities of Kurdish nationalists have been developing, aimed at uniting all Kurds, also to fight the central government. The task of nationalists is the same: to achieve the unification and independence of Kurdistan. Sheikh Obeidullah convened a congress of Kurdish leaders and tribal chiefs for the first time, where Turkey's provocative policy of inciting Kurds against neighboring Armenians and Aisors was revealed in order to distract them from separatist aspirations. At this meeting, it was decided to unite the Persian and Turkish Kurds for a common struggle against the governments of these countries. However, the uprising failed. Since that time, the Turkish sultan's government has been striving in every way to involve the Kurds in national life and to bind the top of the Kurdish aristocracy to itself. The famous Sultan cavalry "Hamidiye" is created from the Kurds, which serves mainly to suppress popular demonstrations and beat Armenians and Aysors. By the time of the reign of one of the most prominent opponents of the national aspirations of the Kurdish people, Abdul Hamid, the first cadres of the Kurdish intelligentsia were already being created abroad, which in 1898, in the city of Kaira, and then in Geneva, published the first Kurdish newspaper "Kurdistan". the 1908 revolution and the overthrow of Abdul Hamid caused a rise in national sentiment in Kurdistan. During this period, the unification of the Kurdish intelligentsia takes place around the established society "Khivia-Kurd" (Kurdish unity). The society had a distinctly national character. It called on all Kurds to create their own nationality, worked out a new alphabet, published nationalist newspapers, magazines, etc. Turkey's chauvinistic policy, the war of 1914-18. used by Britain, which, wishing to win over the Kurdish intelligentsia to its side, promises to support them in the struggle for independence. Thus, England uses the national aspirations of the Kurds for its imperialist goals. After World War II, England gets Iraq. But in the north of Iraq, in the oil-rich and of extremely important strategic importance, both for the fight against Turkey and the USSR, the Mosul vilayet, there are Kurds. And so, England is campaigning for the annexation of Mosul to Iraq, for which the Kurdish leaders are being processed. According to the unfulfilled Treaty of Sevres in 1920, an independent Kurdish kingdom was even created, which was supposed to be under British leadership. However, the Kurdish leaders soon became convinced that the British were trying to turn Kurdistan into their colony, easily forgetting all their promises of freedom and independence. A number of uprisings were the response of the Kurds to such a provocative policy, and the British, seeing the collapse of their plans, began to act in the usual "colonial" way. With the help of armored cars and airplanes, they bring the Kurds into submission, this time there is no question of national self-determination. In 1926 England finally gets the legal right to Mosul and immediately proceeds to prepare it as a springboard for the fight against the USSR. The position of the Kurds in the new Turkey is also not particularly favorable. The narrowly nationalistic nature of the domestic policy pursued by the Turkish bourgeoisie does not recognize the right of the other peoples of Turkey to independent national development. The Turks claim that the Kurds are the same Turks as they are, that the Kurds have neither a national feeling, nor any political and cultural prerequisites for independent existence. Such a policy puts the Kurds in a hostile camp, which is very skillfully used by Britain, which is openly inciting the Kurds against Turkey. In 1925, with the help of British material assistance, a clearly reactionary uprising was raised by the most reactionary leaders of the Turkish Kurds. Under the flag of religion and the struggle for the restoration of the caliph (the religious head of all Muslims), who was overthrown by the Turks in 1924, the Kurdish sheikh-feudal lords fought to preserve their rights and their power. This action was suppressed by the Turks with great cruelty. Simultaneously with the uprising of the Turkish Kurds, there were also uprisings of the Kurds of Persia (the uprising in the period of 1920, 23rd year, under the leadership of Simko and others) under the slogan of national self-determination. So far, all the uprisings have been liquidated, the leaders have been executed or exiled; Kurds, like hundreds of years ago, are driven from their homes and transferred by whole families to remote areas. However, despite the reactionary speeches of individual Kurdish feudal lords, enthralling entire tribes and seeking, in the struggle against the central government, their personal goals, a genuine national movement is growing and developing among the Kurds and a Kurdish intelligentsia is created, which is destined to be the instigator and organizer of the struggle for the national independence of the people, whose political future is still ahead. It is interesting to note that the idea of ​​independence has been living with the Kurdish people for many centuries. One of the remarkable Kurdish poets, Amed Hani, as early as 1650, in his fiery poem "Memuzin", written in Arabic letters in the Kurdish language, in bright stanzas conveys the aspirations of the Kurdish social thought of his time. This poem extremely vividly describes the entire political life of the Kurds, which, incidentally, remains almost the same at the present time. "Kurds live between two fires and in any war they cover valleys and gorges with their corpses" The plight of the Kurds, their darkness, ignorance , constant wars, all this hinders the process of unification of the Kurds, ”says the poet. Indeed, the constant intervention of the Persian, Turkish, Russian, and then the British governments in the life of the Kurds had the most corrupting effect on the Kurds. And to this day, the Kurds, with a rich historical past, rich epic folk literature, are considered the most backward people of Asia Minor. Turks and Persians have always used the backwardness of the Kurds. Subsequently, tsarist Russia added its intrigues to the intrigues of these two forces, and not a single Kurdish uprising in the 19th and 20th centuries. did not pass without the active participation of the tsarist agents. “The Kurds were and still remain a plaything in the hands of foreign forces. But along with this, before our eyes, the politically Kurdish "V intelligentsia is developing. By now it is already a significant force that opposes itself to the feudal lords and begins to carry out: great preparatory and revolutionary work to unite all Kurds into one national whole .Selection of the Kurds living in the USSR into an independent unit (Kurdistan Region) —the great organizational work carried out here by the Soviet authorities in the economic, political and social spheres — will undoubtedly serve as a model and example for all foreign Kurds, who are both in the socio-economic, \. and cultural and political terms, the most backward people of Asia Minor.That is why our Transcaucasian Kurdistan is of particular importance.We must study the way of life, customs, the economic situation of the Soviet Kurds, we must especially carefully and carefully approach all of them needs and requirements, including taking special care of development and the upbringing of a Kurdish woman. We must always remember that the policy in relation to our Transcaucasian Kurds, the evolution of their economic and social life, is followed by three million neighboring Turkish, Iraqi and Persian Kurds. And, perhaps, they not only follow, but will also take over all the achievements of the Soviet Kurds and carry them out. A wide belt encircling on the one hand the Soviet Transcaucasia and Turkmenistan, with a friendship, is the Turkish-Persian border, a territory occupied by foreign Kurds, thanks to its elevated position (mountains and the fertile valleys surrounding them), as it were, commands all-V) - the adjacent regions and dominates the Mesopotamian Plain (Iraq) and the routes south to English possessions. Such an advantageous geographical position gives Kurdistan an extremely important strategic importance. Given this circumstance, England is striving to firmly return here in order to threaten three neighboring states: Turkey, USSR and Persia. Initially, all Kurds were divided into tribes (called Ashirets and Iliyats) or clans, and led a nomadic lifestyle. But over time, in the era of strife and invasions of Mongols, Seljuk Turks and others, some clans were scattered, the ancestors were exterminated and non-tribal Kurds appeared, who were the first to settle on the earth. H, Under the influence of an increase in population and the benefits provided by agriculture, most of the tribal (ashiret) Kurds also built villages for themselves. Saddled Kurds are completely subordinate to the authorities and bear all the duties. In Persian Kurdistan, the Kurds are subordinate to the government to varying degrees: all sedentary Kurds living; in cities, they are obliged on an equal basis with the rest of the population; few nomads pay monetary dues, and are quite independent in their internal affairs. Kurdish tribes, even sedentary ones, usually move with their herds in the mountains to the best pastures in the summer, and they do not respect the established state borders at all. There are transitions of tribes and for political reasons. This phenomenon contributes to the unification of all Kurdish tribes and develops common national interests. "Iashi information about the life of the Kurds, about the history of this people is extremely small. Of the very limited number of works about the Kurds (mainly Russian and English), a large one. the part is devoted either to linguistics (the study of the Kurdish language), or it presents descriptions of a purely military nature, dwelling on the issues of the passability of troops in Kurdistan and studying the Kurds, as a military force capable of playing one or another role in military conflicts with neighboring states. There is still no history of the Kurdish people, there is no geographical and ethnic description of the territories occupied by the Kurds, and a general Kurdish alphabet has not been developed (Kurds write in Arabic letters). Of course, the economic development of the Kurds is not the same. On the mountains, the Kurds lead a semi-sedentary lifestyle, the customs here are very wild, the power of the feudal lords is strong, subsistence farming still dominates here, in the valleys and on the plain, the Kurds have already turned into landowners, they also know the market, and the consumer is mainly a speculator buying wool, carpets and dairy products for next to nothing. The low degree of economic development of the Kurds is due to the existence of a feudal system here. Studying the Turkish and Persian Kurds, one can establish their division into two classes: 1) chiefs (called mir, aha, malko, pashmir) with their squads (hunami) and 2 ) farmers who have already settled on the land and are obliged to pay the chiefs a third of their harvest. This class is subordinate and often consists of other ethnic groups. It is adjoined by the Nestorian tribes, the Aysor and the Armenians, who are subordinate to the Kurds and who have managed to mix with them, and they all bear the name "Raya." From the class of chiefs, the dominant clans stand out, supplying sheikhs and leaders. At the center of Kurdish feudalism is not land ownership, but a tribe subordinate to the feudal lord. All the customary law of the Kurds is based on the tribe, and the Kurdish law is based mainly on customary law. Extremely backward forms of the tribal system, customary law, existence in full force of the customs and traditions of ancestors, such as bloody revenge, etc., endless quarrels over pastures, and, finally, the unlimited power of the feudal sheikhs leads to the fact that along with the economic backwardness — the Kurds are at a very low cultural level; they have almost no schools. The Kurdish intelligentsia develops and receives education mainly in Turkey and abroad. Of great importance in the life of the Kurds is enmity, both among themselves and with the Armenians living next to them. Previously, they tried to explain this by purely religious motives and the hatred of Muslim Kurds towards Christian Armenians, however, it must be pointed out that the main role in this enmity was played by economic reasons and the agrarian issue, which is extremely acute for the Kurds. All trade in the territory where the Kurds live was in the hands of the Armenian bourgeoisie, to which all tax collections were surrendered at auction. Everyone who lived in Asia knows that since the end of the 19th century. Kurds-nomads begin to settle to the ground, descend from their mountains and seize the villages of Armenian farmers. The Turkish government was not in a position to regulate this issue, it limited itself only to the fact that it led the Kurds to the Armenians and helped them to ruin the Armenian village. In this way it thought to get rid of the Armenians and to protect itself from the tsarist Russia standing behind them. After the World War and the Turkish Revolution, when most of the Armenian population perished, the Kurds captured all the Armenian villages, settled firmly on the land and engaged in arable farming. In addition to the struggle between the clans, we see, among the Kurds, a struggle between the feudal elite and the rich, on the one hand, and the working people, on the other. Sometimes several clans of the rich unite together and fight against representatives of the poor clans. The character of family relations and the position of women among all Kurdish tribes scattered over the vast territory of Asia Minor, Persia and Soviet Transcaucasia are basically the same. It should be noted here that, despite the belonging of the Kurds to different Muslim denominations (Turkish and Iraqi - Sun-Fig. 1. Summer dwelling of the Kurds in the "yalags". Nits, Yezidis; Transcaucasian Shiites, Yezidis, after 1918 most of the Sunnis moved to Turkey; Persian Shiites and aliallahis), the religion did not leave a noticeable imprint on the Kurds and did not exert its influence on the position of women, as we see with other Muslim peoples. Kurds are generally not religious. Their woman occupies a more independent position than the woman of the neighboring Armenians, Persians and Turkic peoples. In addition to the fact that a woman participates in all important events in the life of her tribe and clan, women atamans and leaders of certain groups often meet. This indicates that there are still remnants of the matriarchy of the most ancient period, when women ruled the life of their tribe. Quite often, women were at the head of military units and during the war they occupied command positions in the Turkish army. Polygamy and seclusion of women among the Kurds is not at all observed. This is explained, on the one hand, by the nature of the economic life of the Kurds - until recently, former nomads, and on the other hand, by the way of family life, when all the work in the field, near livestock and at home lies with a woman. True, under the influence of the environment, Kurdish aristocrats, trying to imitate Turkish and Persian in everything, introduced in themselves: harems (a special room for women), force their women to enter from the house with a closed face and even got several wives, but these innovations did not take root at all to the Kurdish people Here, it should be noted that with the process of the Kurds settling on the ground, the position of the Kurdish woman begins to gradually change towards her greater depersonalization and greater dependence on her husband-owner. Sedentary Kurds more easily adopt from the Turks and Persians their way of family life and their attitude towards women. The same phenomenon is observed among our Soviet Kurds, who borrow a lot from the Turks living among them. The process of mixing with the surrounding peoples is also of great importance here. Although the Kurds, in principle, marry only women of their kind, in fact they are increasingly taking wives from the Neighboring Peoples; this phenomenon is especially observed in the Transcaucasia. In view of the fact that the main features of life and the position of a Kurdish woman are common to all Kurds and differ in insignificant details, mainly in relation to wedding ceremonies, costumes and some customs, this brochure will describe the situation of the Transcaucasian Kurdish woman. Description of the Transcaucasian Kurdish woman, who has preserved, until now, the way of life and customs common to all Kurdish women and, among others with this, embarking on a new path of life, bringing economic and political equality, cultural life and knowledge, seems to be the most indicative. The depiction of the position of the Kurdish woman in the old way of life, which is still lived by foreign Kurds, and along with this, a description of the new forms of life of a Kurdish woman and the methods of work to introduce her to life, as an equal member of society, using all the achievements of science and technology in her new life - will serve as the best example for a foreign Kurdish woman. 2. Transcaucasian Kurdistan The Kurds and their kindred Yezidi Kurds (referred to below) of our Transcaucasia, populate mainly the Kurdistan Region of the Azerbaijan SSR, formed in 1923, and some districts of the Armenian SSR similar to it in terms of natural conditions in which they constitute a minority ^ of the population. For this reason, we will trace the life of a Kurdish woman, mainly in the Kurdistan Region, later called Soviet Kurdistan. The total number of Kurds and Yezidis, by the turn of 1926, is determined at 58 thousand, while 50 thousand of them live within Azerbaijan and 8 thousand within Armenia. The Kurdistan Region, located in the mountainous part of eastern Transcaucasia, resembles foreign Kurdistan in terms of its territory ... It borders on the west and south with Armenia (Novo-Bo-Yazetek and Zangezur districts), in the north with Nagorno-Karabakh and in the east with the Jebrail V) district of the ASSR. The entire district is cut by deep gorges and mountain ranges (Karabakh and others). The northern part is a vast area of ​​the most excellent alpine pastures, the so-called "yalags". These pastures, like those of neighboring Karabakh, attract, in summer, herds of numerous nomads from neighboring regions. The climate, as in all foreign Kurdistan, is harsh on high-mountain alpine meadows, with the exception of the basins, where, thanks to protection from cold winds , the climate is milder and warmer. However, wheat here often does not ripen, and if it does ripen, then it yields two or three itself. Winter lasts about seven months. The summer is sultry. Only 72 thousand dessiatines are used for crops and pastures out of the total amount of all comfortable and inconvenient land of 324 thousand dessiatines.the rest, with the exception of those occupied by the forest, is unsuitable for processing and cattle breeding (mountain tops, precipices, cliffs). The forests of the Kurdistan Region, consisting mainly (of oak, maple, hornbeam, karachag, etc.), have a huge water protection and protective Significantly, they are located in extremely rugged terrain, often on very steep and steep slopes. The soil, in most cases, is rocky, with a low content of humus. Some forest dachas are located near the Julfa-Baku railway line. and with the completion of its construction it will receive full sale of the forest. Kurdistan Region is rich in various healing mineral springs. The Kelbajar hot spring "Isti-Su" and especially the water of the spring "Kotur-Su" from scabies and all kinds of skin diseases are widely known among the population. Most recently, in the Kosh-tash area, large seams of coal were discovered, coming out. According to the study, it turned out that the coal of this paradise is of very high quality. The main disaster of the county is its impassability. All communication is supported by bad mountain country roads; the usual way of getting around is on horseback. The lack of roads not only interferes with the systematic exploitation of the natural resources of this region, but has the most unfavorable effect on its economic development, is the cause of frequent hunger for both the population and livestock, and, most importantly, serves as a brake on introducing the Kurds to Soviet culture, reforms in all areas of life of this backward people of our Union. Agriculture and cattle breeding (in the northern part) are the predominant occupation of the Kurds. The Kurds have been engaged in snake farming for a long time, because of the lack of pasture. But the Kurds are poorly provided with arable land; one smoke (family) has arable land three times less than a family in other districts of Azerbaijan. With such a weak provision of the sown area of ​​the population, and with relatively meager harvests, their own grain is not enough. In addition to these unfavorable phenomena, in Kurdistan, under-sowing is often observed, both due to a lack of seed material, and the lack of precisely fixed land areas allocated to a particular village. With the establishment of Soviet power here, work began on the nationalization of the land and on the land organization of the Kurds, moreover, they had to work in extremely difficult conditions among the ignorant population, in addition, intimidated and terrorized by their own kulaks and reactionary clergy. But one way or another, many communities received cuts. Usually, before plowing, several householders conspire to plow their land with common forces, using for this purpose their draft animals, agricultural implements, vehicles and their labor and personal strength. They plow with a wooden plow (jute), which accounts for almost 80 farms. For threshing, two planks are used with stuffed steel or flint shields. Instead of winnowing machines, they use a simple shovel, and so on. Each peasant should have his own seeds for sowing. For harvesting, grain and straw are divided either by workers' souls or by livestock. All field work is carried out on oxen or buffaloes. Lack of draft animals, agricultural implements, lack of culture of the population, lack of roads are evidence of the low capacity of the Kurdish peasant economy.On the low plains, in depressions and low elevations, all vegetation burns out during the summer and with the beginning of spring, herders go closer to the mountains, and then move higher , hoping to find enough food in the left places in the fall. Thus, the basins, abandoned for the summer, serve only as winter huts or "kish-lags" - (kish — winter, lag — dwelling). Under the migrations or yalags (yay — summer, lag — dwelling, camp) there are places unsuitable for agriculture, mainly mountain ridges and their slopes. In winter they are covered with deep snow. In the short summer period, herbaceous vegetation develops here, suitable for grazing. Usually yalags are significantly removed from populated areas up to 150 versts and there are no bearable wheel roads to them, which makes it impossible to use pasture as hayfields. Due to the lack of convenient land for plowing, in the central and southern parts of Kurdistan, their own bread is only enough for 3-4 months. Therefore, half of the population is forced to leave for the winter in the low-lying areas of neighboring counties and stay there until spring, as farm laborers, with local owners, or on out-of-town trades. ”As already noted, the social organization, way of life and way of life of the Transcaucasian Kurds, in general terms , are similar to the life of all foreign Kurds, with the only difference that after the October Revolution, semi-savage and backward Kurds were introduced to cultural life, a huge work is being done among them to improve their economic well-being, while foreign Kurds continue to live the same life , continue to be under the rule of their feudal sheikhs, who diligently protect them from any civilization. The Kurds of our Transcaucasia split into several tribes speaking different dialects. In pre-revolutionary times, tribes were headed by ancestors or simply rich. They, with the support of the clergy, carried out judgment and punishment and could even expel the guilty from the tribe. The tribes, in turn, were divided into small societies, each of which had its own foreman "ruspa". It was his responsibility to collect taxes and solve, with the help of the honorable old men of society, unimportant matters. All Kurds used to be headed by "el-bei". In relation to el-bei, the Kurds carried some duty — during the migration they transported his yurt for free, went to the forest for firewood, etc. In addition, every Kurd, entering into marriage, had to give him a bull in the form of a tribute. Every year el-bei's servants traveled to the villages and collected the bulls due to him for the "right of marriage". El-Begi solved all kinds of civil cases: disputes about inheritance, divorce between spouses, about yurts between the heads of the oba (community), cases of theft, kidnapping of girls, etc. Serious criminal offenses were tried by the local chief. El Begs had the right to str. Fat, of course, to their advantage, and subject to corporal punishment. The most severe punishment was considered the so-called "talankirin", that is, the surrender of the property of the perpetrator to plunder and his expulsion from society and the tribe. After the implementation of judicial reforms throughout Transcaucasia, in pre-revolutionary times, the el-bei's power was severely limited. The Kurds ‘established rural communities and courts, and in the districts with the Kurdish population the office of“ bailiff over the Kurds ”was established, who served mainly to bring the rebellious Kurds into submission to the tsarist authorities. The bailiffs treated the local population in the most rude manner, making their own judgment and reprisals. Usually, with a whip in hand, they carried out orders of the authorities among the illiterate Kurds and collected all kinds of taxes from them. Unlike the Kurds, the Yezidis continued to have spiritual courts of sheikhs, which dealt mainly with cases of violation of religion and marriage. This was the case before the revolution, which destroyed both the bailiffs and the spiritual courts of the sheikhs. Instead, village councils and people's courts were established everywhere. The Kurdish community (both) consists of smokes (families). The number of families in the community varies. When forming a community, the Kurds try to ensure that the total number of herds does not exceed a thousand heads of small ruminants, since numerous herds can hardly get their food. * Both represent a democratic community, everyone, its members enjoy the same rights. The center of the Kurdistan Region is the city of Lachin (Abdalyar), it is like a tiny mushroom stuck! to the mountain hanging over him. Lachin is building up feverishly. The brand new houses of the outpatient clinic, school, cooperative, club and the walls of the first, recently opened, orphanage shine in the sun. Here and there you can hear the sound of axes, the rumble of roofing iron; the smoke from the furnaces burning lime stretches along the gorge in a thick veil, and the obliging chaichi lure passers-by with thick samovars and red-hot coals of magals. Around the cooperative shop, peasants stand in heaps, buying manufactory, kerosene, sugar. According to the 1926 census, a total of 434 people live in Lanich, of whom 339 are men and 95 women. Through the mountains covered with snow and crushing with their hulks, along narrow gorges, where you can get only by climbing steep slopes and along paths, along small rivers lead roads to the villages and hamlets of Kurdistan. In general, there are not so many of them, and there are no more than 10 large ones, having at least local economic significance. The largest village, Minkend, has up to 1,500 inhabitants. Here people live in small houses, stone or wooden, rather poor and uncomfortable. Most of the Kurds, both Soviet and foreign, live in small villages, usually located near rivers or springs. Houses, or, more correctly, dugouts, are more like burrows than human dwellings. Part of the population lives in caves carved into the sedimentary rocks of the mountains. Sometimes it is only by the barking of dogs and the constantly swirling smoke that one can guess about the existence of a Kurdish dwelling. In winter, when the village is covered with snow, dugouts are visible only at a very close distance. The walls of dug-out houses are built of clay. Logs and brushwood are placed on top and then the roof is covered with earth. A hole is left in the roof for daylight. Usually, the Kurds have one room in the dugout, the wealthy have two and three. In one of them live wives with children, in the other are men, the third serves as a pantry, it contains supplies, a rolled-up tent; to a barn next to it, a passage often leads through rooms. The hearth is located in the middle of the room, there are boilers and food is cooked here. When a fire is made, the whole room is filled with thick smoke. Life in the winter is monotonous especially for men. Women do housework, weave, knit. A mother teaches her children the same craft. Not knowing how to weave and knit is a shame for the Kurdish woman; such women are known under the name "nazan", that is, The hearth is of great importance in the family life of the Kurds. He settles in the middle of a dugout, or a tent and consists of three stones arranged in a triangle. The hearth for the Kurd is something sacred; you can't spit into it, throw filth and everything that can desecrate the fire — the sacred element of the Kurdish beliefs. On the day of the commemoration, firewood should be burning in the hearth, and not dung, as in ordinary times. On important occasions, the Kurd swears by the hearth. Although the Kurds do not support the unquenchable fire in the hearth day and night, they always take care that the fire does not go out. Women consider this detrimental to family well-being, arguing that in this case, the sheep and cows will stop giving milk, and the lambs will go blind. That Kurdish woman is considered a good housewife who, during the spring, until the sheep are cursed, keeps the fire going day and night and does not turn to neighbors for it. In general, the fire from the hearth is not allowed to be taken when there is a cauldron of milk on it, otherwise the teats of cows and sheep will crack. In all this, the remnants of the ancient cult of the sacred fire are visible, which has now turned into superstition. The hearth serves as a symbol of the family. The son, having separated from the father, first of all builds a hearth and takes fire from the parental home. When a new baby is given a name, then he is carried around the hearth and the navel, cut off at birth and saved until that day, is buried in it, as a sign that the newborn from that moment becomes a real member of the family. The daughter, getting married and leaving her home, walks around the hearth, as if saying goodbye to him. The language of the Kurds belongs to the group of Iranian languages, consisting, as you know, of the languages: Persian, Afghani, Ossetian, etc. The Kurds in Transcaucasia occupy a real territory with XVI century, when they moved from Persia and Turkey. Living for several centuries among the Turkic population, the Kurds of Transcaucasia managed to largely lose their native language, which until now does not have its own alphabet and is only spoken! language. Currently, only a minority of Kurds have not yet forgotten their Kurdish language (Kur-manji); almost all Kurds speak the Turkic language, which is the state language in which all office work is conducted. The influence of the surrounding Turkic environment, as well as the conditions of economic life, is noticeably reflected on all aspects of the material and spiritual life of the Kurds and testifies to the process of the merger of the Kurds: with the Turks. By religion, the Kurds are Muslims. The largest religious sect of the Kurds of Armenia is the Yezidis. Yezidis are Kurds, in the full sense of the word. The proof is: the common language, type, way of life and the whole culture in general, like the Kurds, Gak and Yezidis. They, like the Kurds, speak the Kurman-Ji dialect, although they themselves call their language “the language of the Yezidis” and assure that the Kurds borrowed their language from them. ”Differences in the way of life of both peoples exist only in details. So, for example, the clothes of the Yezidis are no different from the Kurdish ones, but a Yezidi woman must wear white linen, which is considered the emblem of innocence and purity; men, on the other hand, cannot wear blue or light blue clothes; the organization of the community is basically the same. But something completely different. represent those aspects of life that are associated with religion. There is a big difference here. Although the Kurds officially profess Islam, their religious beliefs are very primitive and represent a mixture of distorted Islam and superstition. In general, the Kurds are not distinguished by their religiosity, although the clergy, thanks to the darkness of the population, enjoy great authority. The Yezidis have their own independent, so far little studied, religious doctrine, distinguished by great antiquity and originality. They profess original dualism and, along with a good undertaking, honor the spirit of denial. Thanks to this, Muslims consider the Yezidis to be devil worshipers and have always subjected them to bloody persecution. This forced the Yezidis to emigrate to Transcaucasia, after its capture by Russia. While the Kurds have neither castes nor estates, among the Yezidis we find a theocratic form of government and a caste system. The entire people is divided into laymen and the closed caste "clergy" (Rouen). The laity are divided into classes of noble and simple, the Ruans into three castes: sheikhs, pirs and fakirs. The territories inhabited by Kurds, later than other regions of Transcaucasia, were subjected to Sovietization. To this wild corner, with huge, overwhelming massiveness. mountains; deep gorges and valleys located between rocks and cliffs, along which small rivers twist like thin snakes, cultural life began to penetrate only a few years ago, the Kurdish mountains, with peaks covered with snow, these centuries-old guardians of Kurdish darkness and ignorance, are the main obstacle to bring the Kurds closer to cultural life. And at present, the Kudistan county is, in fact, cut off from political and economic centers. The government of the Azerbaijan SSR has to exert colossal efforts in order to properly manage the work on the development of this corner and on the restoration of its economic significance. Here you have to start by introducing the Kurds to culture, to build roads, eradicating eradicate old customs, morals, change everyday life, fight the influence of the clergy, beks, and finally - regulate the issues of pastures, crops, build houses, schools, hospitals, clubs, fight the darkness and ignorance of the Kurds. In fact, Sovietization of Kurdistan began only in 1921. In the same year, the first agricultural census was carried out here, which established the darkness of the Kurds, completely unheard of for our entire Union. Here are some typical figures: literate Kurdish men are only 1.44%, women - 0.04%, literate of both sexes - 0.68%. If we discard children under 8 years old, then literacy will represent the following picture: men - 2.44%, women - 0.07%, both sexes - 1.09%. For one hundred adults, one is literate, that is, who can read and write in Kurdish or Turkic (state language). The Russian language is almost unknown here. Beden kendli (a peasant) in Kurdistan, but stubbornly struggles with a cruel and harsh nature towards him. He has little knowledge in order to overcome all difficulties more successfully, easier and sooner. After the revolution, the Kurd felt this and began to appreciate the knowledge that helped him, the poor kendli, in the struggle for his life. Therefore, his craving for learning is understandable. And Kendley encourages her kids to go to school. But the Kurdistan Region is not rich in schools. There are only 42 of them in 390 settlements. There are no funds, no suitable buildings and, most importantly, no teachers. The People's Commissariat of Education began to build, began, erected the walls, and so they stand, school skeletons. Only recently have they begun to build two-room schools in Malibek, Kurtkaji, Jamber-te, Chaikenda and Isti-bulag. In the meantime, most of the existing 42 schools are in completely abnormal conditions. Kendley lives in cave dugouts. Many Kurdish schools are also housed in dugouts; children study in these schools without windows and go blind. Blind in the most real and terrible sense of the word. By 1927, 450 blind schoolchildren were registered in the county. Apparently, active measures are already being taken against this phenomenon, and the above fact of the construction of 8 school houses speaks for this. There are several courses on the eradication of illiteracy in the county, but they are also placed in dugouts. The situation with the reading-huts is no better — one per 180 points, that is, per 25 thousand population. Cooperation is still poorly developed here. There is one agricultural credit partnership, which in 1927 released 1,026 units to the peasants. agricultural implements., There are only two cooperatives in the county; one cooperative shop serves almost 80 settlements. The difficult situation and the difficulty of work are aggravated here by the fact that the number of Kurdish members of the CPSU (b) is still too small. In total, about 150 people (party members) work in the district, and only recently there has been a noticeable tendency to party from the peasantry. The local administration and party activists are doing the hard work of raising the cultural level and changing the living conditions of the population. For the most part, these are invisible heroes who tirelessly ride in their lamb hats, on small horses, along the Kurdistani roads — these goat paths that run along the edge of the cliffs. All day long they climb high mountain passes and go down to villages and villages to hold election meetings, instruct the village council or explain new laws to the population. This is how a new way of life and a new life for the Transcaucasian Kurds are being built. 
3. Transcaucasian Kurdish woman before Sovietization
The Transcaucasian Kurdish woman is completely immersed in the heavy duties of servicing the household and family. Usually wives and children carry out a number of heavy household chores: loading packs, carrying water, milking cattle, collecting fuel and everywhere carrying babies tied on their backs with a wide belt. Women do not hide their faces, in the crowd they stand interspersed with men and participate on an equal basis with them in the life of their community. In the absence of her husband in the village, the hostess receives the visitor. The Kurds do not have seclusion, like the neighboring Turks. If a Kurdish woman is distinguished by intelligence or beauty, - her name is added to the name of her son and some Bapita-Shashan - carries; everywhere the name of his mother is Shashan. The freer position of a Kurdish woman favorably distinguishes her from a Turkic woman who is downtrodden and hidden from the eyes of strangers. This circumstance greatly facilitates the work among women to involve them in Soviet construction and local councils. Women wear a shirt made of chintz or red fabric. The women's caftan is no different from the men's; he is girded with a shawl or other cloth. On festive days or during a wedding, the Kurdish woman wears a wide, front-cut "talma" made of red cloth over the caftan and decorated with silk ribbons and laces. In addition, she wears a wide, long apron. The girls sew a fez into the headdress, into its upper part, and thread a wooden hoop into it so tightly that a round platform is formed above it, pins are inserted into this platform in front, on which they put red beads. In addition to the headdress, women wear jewelry: necklaces made of beads, earrings, rings, and sometimes "mehik" are small round silver jewelry that is inserted into the nose from the outside, on the right side. In Turkish Kurdish women, it is replaced by a silver ring, from which there is a chain, attached either behind the ear or at the shoulder. There are coins hanging on the chain, and all members of the family, of course, obey the father, as the head of the family. In relation to his wife, he is her complete master. She has no right to do anything without his will; the husband has the right to inflict severe beatings on her, and in case of betrayal, the popular custom gives him the right to cut off her nose and ears. The Transcaucasian Kurds did not have such barbarism, only the expression was preserved in the language: “the nose and ears are cut off,” which testifies that such a reprisal once took place. The power of the father over the children is as strong as over the wife. However, infanticide is despised by everyone. The father even has the right to dispose of the middle of the daughter; he can give her out for an expensive ransom for a person whom she does not love. The father has the right to dissolve the daughter's marriage, but only when, after marriage, one of her relatives kills her husband's relative or vice versa, since the relationship between enemies is prohibited by custom (if the relatives reconcile, the marriage is not dissolved) ; secondly, the father can dissolve the marriage when the son-in-law offends the wife for no reason. This operation is profitable for the father, since he returns to the husband only a part of the dowry received for his daughter and gets the opportunity to marry her a second time and receive a new ransom. In general, when she marries, the daughter is freed from the direct dependence of the father. Popular custom does not give the mother significant family authority; on the contrary, after the death of her husband, she even becomes in some dependent position on her son; in general, the mother has only a moral influence on the children. Under the guidance of the mother, daughter and daughter-in-law, they spin and knit wool, do all the housework. The husband owns all property, but the wife has separate property, consisting of the offspring of a cow or mare, donated to her by relatives; in fact, the husband, of course, also uses her property. The birth of a child is accompanied by magical rites and superstitious customs among the Kurds. Irises are born in the house on straw laid on an earthen floor. The husband leaves the house at the time of delivery and returns in a day or two. Before giving birth, they turn to the mullah and he writes the talisman "dua" for the welfare of the family. After giving birth, the mullah writes another "dua" for the happiness and well-being of the mother and child. For their labors, the mullah receives a cow, a bull or other cattle. In difficult childbirth, they tear the woman in labor by the ears, shout loudly in her ear, calling to wake up, saying that a brother, a guest has arrived, etc. If the V woman faints, they shoot from guns to bring her to consciousness; sometimes they go to the river and cut with a dagger. water (a magic technique of cutting what binds the woman in labor). According to popular belief, a woman in labor is attacked by a special creature "Hal-anasy". She looks like a terrible woman; Hal-anasy cuts out the heart and lungs of a woman in labor, carries them to the river and washes them in water. If she has time to do this, the woman dies. To drive out the Hal-anases, they shoot the puppies from guns. If children die in the house, they turn to the mullah. He explains that the child died because a woman came to the house with a harmful "dua", but if he is given a cow or a sheep, he will write a "dua" that will destroy the deadly power of harmful "dua" and the children will not die at. The name of the child is given by women. This is an echo of the former matriarchy. The mullahs, who have seized everything from which one can derive benefit, arrogate to themselves the right to choose a name for the child. Mulla rummages in his magic book (the book "Dua-kitaba", or "Jameidavad") and declares that if the child is called not by that name, he will certainly die. And the frightened parents rush to fulfill the demand of the mullah, who receives a reward for advice .Children are breastfed up to 2-3 years. Attitude towards boys I3 Kurdish woman. Caring, even gentle. Attitude towards a girl is worse. If a woman gives birth to girls alone, they look at her with regret, while her family scolds her. To protect children from the evil eye, evil spirits and other misfortunes, talismans are a reliable remedy. Under the cradle of a child, bread is put as such a talisman, which the devils are afraid of. There are children completely hung with such talismans. Ethnographer G. Chursin, in 1924, saw in the village. Molla-Ahmedlu of a one-year-old boy, who hung on his shoulder: a prayer "dua" sewn into a black cloth, a shell, a bead, a metal plaque, and on his back there was a triangular "dua" and several beads strung on colored woolen threads. Since his birthday, pope the idea of ​​the child and his upbringing lies with. responsibilities of the mother. Both boys and girls attend meetings of men and women, where they listen to the conversations of adults. From the age of seven, children are already involved in the household, go after the cattle, etc. From a youthful age, the son grazes his flocks or goes to the shepherds, moreover, he often goes to another tribe. A few years later he returns with his small herd earned by him. Girls from the age of seven have been spinning and weaving wool. On migrations, after dinner, they gather on the river bank or in the shade and, singing songs, spin wool and knit socks. Guys often join them. A woman is morally superior to a man. Kurdish women are distinguished by their loyalty and honesty. Fidelity is seen even in women who do not marry for love; there are almost no prostitutes among Kurdish women. Religion (Mohammedanism) allows a Kurd to marry a lot, but the majority of Kurds do not recognize him, while a Yezidi always has one wife. Only the chiefs of the Kurdish tribes, and the rich, had two wives. Kurds and especially Yezidis always take wives from their kind. For marriage, the Kurds did not have a certain age, usually men married 15 years, and women 10 years. There are two types of marriage known to Kurds: a) through abduction, i.e. when a girl is kidnapped against her will Rhys. 3. Persian Kurds. Or with her consent, but against the wishes of the parents; and b) marriage through purchase (kalym) by mutual consent of both the young and the parents. The Yezidis practice only this last type of marriage. Kidnapping is detrimental. The relatives pursue the kidnapper and kill him where they catch up, the girl is exposed to the same fate if she ran away of her own free will. If the kidnapper fled, then his parents' house was destroyed. The only way to avoid revenge is to surrender under the auspices of a noble person who negotiates with the parents of the kidnapped and for a large ransom they forgive the kidnappers. A peaceful marriage, for a ransom, took place, and even now it is happening in this way: in a house where there is a bride , a matchmaker is sent, who conducts all negotiations; only after their completion, the groom's father comes to the bride's house with bread and salt and turns to her father, in the presence of witnesses, relatives, asks about his consent to the marriage of his daughter with his son. The daughter's father answers in the affirmative, again referring to the witnesses present. Then the parents share the bread and salt, one of the guests gives the mother a silver ring for the bride, and each guest gives the bride a gift according to his condition. After a while, in the bride's house, a feast is arranged, and the bride in poor families usually does not participate in it. This is called the daznigari betrothal rite. From that time on, the young couple made secret night meetings, which in Kurdish are called "dizi e-buke" (bride stealing). A few months later, the groom's father again goes to the bride's house for negotiations. He gives the bride's parents a ransom in money, rams, bulls, depending on the state, and always a horse with a saddle. On the day the "attekirin" final consent is expressed, the groom's father gives the bride's father or brother a gun or revolver and money. The bride brings a dowry consisting of carpets, bedding and other woolen goods, as well as money. If a poor man marries, the whole community collects a ransom for him. At the end of the negotiations, a wedding follows. On the appointed day, all the invited guests gather at the groom; before dinner, women and men dance together. After the dance, the guests go to the bride; if she is from another village, then only close relatives go, and they bring her along with her friends to the groom; the bride's face is usually covered with red cloth. The groom at this time, having bought in a river or a spring, takes part in the guys' game "rakago". With a party of winners, the groom approaches his house, where he is met by girls with with songs. The guests have fun with the groom all day. In the evening, the mullah performs a "kebin" - a marriage ceremony and, having received a gift, leaves. They circle the bride 1-3 times around the hearth and say: "We took you here and you must serve this house until the last minute." A few weeks later, the bride returns to her parents and from there she goes to her own house. The situation of a young daughter-in-law in her husband's house cannot be considered difficult. The young woman enjoys special care and attention until the first birth, all this time she is considered as a guest; after the first birth, she finally becomes part of the family and becomes in a position the same as with other daughters-in-law. It is the responsibility of the younger daughter-in-law to wash the feet of all elders in the house and guests. Like many other eastern peoples, wife and husband do not call each other by name.
4. Soviet Kurdish woman
Semi-unfair position in the family and society, observance of religious rules in views on; a woman, as a lower being, fear of the law and her husband, ignorance and terrible illiteracy (only one literate for 4,000 women) —these are the characteristic features of the position of a Kurdish woman. Here prejudices still reign, the intoxicating power of religion, social illnesses and high infant mortality — these are the inevitable consequences of the living conditions of culturally backward peoples. Even in many remote areas of Kurdistan, with the most ignorant and fanatical population, Soviet laws in the field of family and marriage relations, combating everyday prejudices and crimes, as going against age-old customs, are considered sinful. In these areas it is terribly difficult to work. Very often, a worker who arrived here for a campaign, before being given a hand, is wrapped in a half of a dress. The living conditions of a woman are determined by the economic conditions of Kurdistan. With the Sovietization, the power of the local bekoe was fundamentally undermined here. Deprived of any privileges, many of them transformed into rich kulaks. The position of women in these families is almost no different from that of the rest of the Kurdish female peasant women, who bear the whole burden of the work on their shoulders. Busy from dawn to dusk, the Dinka hens almost never leave their dugout or tent on a nomad. If we add to this that her family life is regulated by remnants of the patriarchal clan system and religious and everyday prejudices, we get a picture of the economic, legal and everyday situation of a Kurdish woman. Despite the fact that here, as in all corners of our Union, women are equal in rights with men, the Soviet code on family and marriage law, on land use, on the right to work and education was introduced, the implementation of all laws, however, encounters difficult obstacles, both economic and domestic. Early marriages, kalym, the tough land reform, all of this has deep roots in the feudal-patriarchal form of economy that is living out here, sanctified by Islam and enshrined in cultural backwardness. All this contributes to the retention of conservative forms of life. Polygamy, early marriages are mainly supported by the wealthy strata, in which they see the support for the institution of property; the poor part of the population supports these customs insofar as they are economically and spiritually dependent on the kulaks and clergy. The Kurdish woman is a little cheaper than the Turks; the average price is 20-50 sheep. At the All-Sesidic conference in Armenia, the question of the right to a woman was on the list! with a question about water and land. And the poor passed a resolution) demanding the abolition of the kalym. However, it should be noted that here the main role was played not by the concern 4 of the woman's personality and not by the desire to improve her lot, but exclusively by the material interests of the man. Poor people demand the abolition of "taxes on women", the abolition of the purchase of wives because they have nothing to pay. They can pay only with their own hump, labor, going to the shepherds, farm laborers to the father of the bride. And the poor man works for seven years until he has worked out the required amount. And seven years will run and ... a rival will appear. Will give more. The father will say: "we need to add." And the poor man is working again as a farm laborer for his beautiful bride. This phenomenon of buying brides is now undergoing a particularly stubborn struggle, led by both the central government of the Azerbaijan Republic and special organizations for work among women. But the methods and ways of this work differ significantly from other areas. First of all, it should be noted here that the exceptional darkness of the Kurds and the conditions of a semi-sedentary life with scattered settlements, exclude the use of the most powerful means — agitation through the press. Not only newspapers, but even leaflets and proclamations are still little available to them. Of the printed material, a colorful and understandable poster can most of all be used. The focus of the Kurdish woman on issues of work and life, on the issues of involving women in public life and productive work is carried out here by organizing women's activists in the villages and holding delegate meetings. Delegate meetings serve as an organizational form of work among women. The results of this, still very modest work, had already affected by 1927, there are 39 delegates in Kurdistan. At meetings, women are extremely interested in everyday issues. Often a kurtinka goes to a meeting with children several miles away and asks to explain to her the new law on registration or on divorce. The new marriage law is especially attracting attention. AzCEC yet | in March 1923, he issued a decree on a new family and marriage law, which abolishes polygamy, sets the age limit for marriage at 18 for men and 16 for women. According to this decree, a woman is equal in all rights with a man. Carrying out work on the study and improvement of the life of women in Azerbaijan is entrusted to the Committee for the Improvement of the Life workers, at AzCIK'e. There are similar committees in the county executive committees. The task of the committees is to assist women in protecting their rights through the appropriate Soviet bodies. In their daily practical work, the committees study the life of women and, on the basis of their experience, submit their proposals to amend and supplement laws concerning women's rights to the legislative bodies and take part in their development. By organizing artels and workshops, the committees improve the economic position of women. The work of the Kurdistan Committee is extremely modest, but in the meantime, it must take up campaigning for women to go to study; he must organize work to eliminate illiteracy among women. The committees also carry out certain propaganda work among men, explaining to them why a woman should be active, why she is called to the council elections, why she should be literate and go to the hospital, and not to the healer. poorly established. There are many reasons for this: the lack of experienced organizers, and the lack of funds and, finally, the extreme conservatism that the Kurdish woman shows to worries about improving her situation. The situation here is also bad with work in the field of protection of mothers and infants. Only recently, in the district, the first orphanage was opened; childcare centers and nurseries are not yet available. Along with the backwardness and darkness of the Kurdish woman, which complicates the transition to a new way of life and a new independent position, it is extremely interesting to note that in one respect, participation in the elections to the councils, a Kurdish woman is far ahead of the Turkish women of Azerbaijan. The reason for this, at first glance, a strange phenomenon is the fact that the Kurdish woman is more free in comparison with the Turkic recluse woman. As stated, Kurdish woman! (not) hides her face, she does not hide from an unfamiliar man, she has long been present at meetings of men and participates in the discussion of various issues. The participation of the Kurdish woman in the work of councils is growing every year, although it is still insufficient in number. Despite the fact that the kulaks and the clergy were campaigning against the participation of women in the re-election of councils, up to 70% of all Kurdish women came to the last elections. Among those elected to the councils were up to 25% of women. This success is generally explained by the activity of the Kurdish woman in matters of government, as well as by the habit of resolving all serious matters on an equal basis with the man. The correct conduct of the elections themselves is also important. This year, summons have been sent out to all Eligible Participants. The very fact of receiving the summons even more prompted the woman to take part in the elections. This is how Comrade Shurkan, who led them in one of the largest settlements of Kurdistan, in the village of Minkand, describes the elections: “Narrow winding streets with corridors, stone sakli, stacked with dung, barking dogs, tall tall men and women hurrying barefoot through the snow with huge water jugs tied behind their backs — such is the morning Minkand. Heaps of Kurds, Fr. pushing something with ardor, a group of picturesquely multi-colored women reaching out to the edge of the village, a flock of rushing boys - everything says that something new, extraordinary has entered the life of the village. We make our way through the narrow corridors to the Shyola building at 5-6 rooms, where some lively Armenian used to sell small change and coal, writing on the wall the number of glasses of tea drunk by the Minkend people. Balcony. Tables heaped with paper. Men are squatting by the balcony; there and then women with children in their arms settled down in a separate group. At first, with apprehension, and then louder and louder, they talk more and more lively about some of their household chores, slyly laugh at the women who come up to the balcony and take out sheets from their bosoms — election agendas. There are already one hundred and forty of them, and new ones are coming and going. ... Having given the summons, they pour into a sea of ​​wide skirts and half-open, swarthy faces, with eyes black as coals. This peculiar solemnity is broken from time to time by a friendly laugh that covers the words of Assad, who is counting the summons over and over again, there are 225 women, of 230, who received the summons, and these two bends of women's faces are burning with anticipation, anticipation of something new, unprecedented. Seeing them, a smile of self-satisfaction spreads across Asada-ami's face. When it came to the election of the chairman of the council, passions flared up, voices drowned out each other, one candidate was replaced by another. The battle was played out around two candidates. The meeting, split in two, is making noise. Each group proves the preference of its candidate. Two orators who spoke especially ardently, suddenly scatter in different directions, calling for like-minded people. And suddenly the peacefully sitting groups rush from their seats and in an instant an unimaginable hustle and bustle arises, in which everything is mixed, both men and women. They calmed down ... and began to determine the strength of each group by eye. The group of a party blacksmith clearly outweighed, and he himself, under loud applause, shifting from foot to foot, shy He smiled. The elections are over, everyone is dispersed, some smiling at their victory, others not believing their defeat. ”In Kurdistan, the growth of women's participation in the work of councils should be taken into account not in hundreds, but in tens and units. Every woman actively working on Soviet construction has enormous political significance here. In Kurdistan, in the village of Mirin, there is already a woman chairman of the village council. The village of Mirin is the winter headquarters of the semi-nomadic Kurds. It is located in a gorge among the rocks and is even invisible near it, since there are no houses in it, and all the premises for livestock and people have been dug! in the rocks. In early spring, people from smoky and dark caves crawl to the top, to the plateau, closer to the sun and cool winds, — there, above, surrounded by their sheep, buffaloes, cows, horses and dogs, spend 6-7 months before the snow. As elsewhere, there is a village council in this village, and a chairman in the village council. But the chairman of the Mirin village council, the only one in almost the entire Kurdistan, is a woman "eldashkhanum" (female comrade), as the Kurds call her. Elderly, but vigorous, with an expressive, open face and energetic movements, the tall "eldashkhanum" is calm confidently leads his small complex world, and nowhere, in any village of the pre-village council does not enjoy such widespread and unconditional authority among the peasants and such deepest trust, and almost fanatical belief in everything that the chairman does not say or advise. At first, it was strange and unusual for the Kurds to see with what ease and experience the chairman handled with a headscarf on his head when carrying out the most difficult, in local conditions, orders of the authorities. Then they gradually got used to it and now they treat their chairman with great respect. The great evil of the Kurdish village is unsanitary conditions. Various epidemics and diseases are raging in the village, infant mortality is increasing, women, due to the lack of the necessary medical personnel, use the services of healers and shepherds. Here is how one eyewitness describes the birth in the Kurdish village of Saltankand: this is an ordinary Kurdish village of 8-10 yards, long ago intermarried. A rare girl marries on the side: she usually stays with one of the countless cousins. “In a bad hour we got here: the sister of our owner, the pre-village council, the 17-year-old girl went in labor agony for the third day and no incantations of the local midwife Gekchay helped. From a dark shack with an earthen floor, on the edge of the village, came the groans of a woman in labor, throbbing on the nerves; the women sat beside her, and the men sat outside at the door. Three days without help, without a midwife, in dirty rags! To Lachin, to a midwife 26 miles, to Minkend to a paramedic — 18 miles. Far away, and then, after all, our grandmothers and mothers did without them and she will manage, if Allah wills, 'says some Kurdish Assad-ami sends a horseman to Lachin for a midwife and we, for a small green samovar, have a long conversation. Midnight was already close, we were still talking about the Kurds, about their life, when the mother of a woman in labor ran into our sakla with the news that a boy was born. To celebrate, the brother of the woman in labor chose the fattest ram and, having performed some spells, cut his throat with a sharp knife. It smelled of meat, blood, steam came from the carcass "... The Kurdish village needs, perhaps more than anywhere else, a midwife , she also badly needs a teacher. The whole matter of developing public education and eliminating illiteracy, and therefore the most essential part of the whole matter of changing everyday life, is due to the lack of the necessary number of teachers. However, even under such difficult conditions, a cadre of women who have already abandoned the old way of life and have joined the ranks of the Communist Party and devote all their strength to work among Kurdish women is gradually being created. True, the number of party Kurdish women is measured only in dozens, they are far from all possessing sufficient knowledge and experience for, work, but still they are an advanced detachment, constantly working on the construction of their Kurdistan. Over the years, along with the growth of the party activist, the Komsomol has been growing and organized. Kurdish girls, thanks to their freer position, of course, only in comparison with the position of girls, Turks, very willingly go to Komsomol clubs, schools and take up Komsomol work. The Komsomol organizations have already managed to reach a significant number of Kurdish youth and penetrate into the Kurdish village, and in all large villages they have their own cells. What are the organizational methods of mass work among Kurdish women? Again, taking into account some of the peculiarities of the situation of women here, all the work has to be started with putting together a female activist in the villages from the most conscientious peasant women delegates, social activists. Without such a female asset, under local living conditions, no work can be done. This is followed by holding general meetings in the villages of delegates with women's activism, and ventures with all women, at which delegates report on the work of the council. That besides, it is necessary to organize county-wide conferences of peasant women and organize courses for promoted social activists. Finally, it is absolutely necessary and useful to involve women members of village councils in the daily practical work of councils, to involve them in work in the registry office, in the people's court, in control over the work of schools, medical centers, etc. The main and shock work here is the struggle for the economic emancipation of the Kurdish woman, the fight against the corrupting influence of the clergy and their material base — ignorance, darkness and deceit. In addition, it is necessary to put the study of domestic and legal issues to the proper height and especially decisively fight the observed murder of women on the basis of marriage and family relations. Summing up the current situation of the Kurdish woman and the work done during the existence of Soviet power, it can be stated that: to emancipate a Kurdish woman in all areas of her life, such as the abolition of kalym, the prohibition of polygamy, the prevention of early marriages, the fight against everyday prejudices, the struggle for education and, finally, new economic conditions of life — are already yielding certain results. The party's activities to strengthen, deepen and encompass work among the Kurdish women already have certain achievements, firstly, in the quantitative growth of Kurdish women in the party, the KSM, in the councils, as well as in other areas of social construction. There is no more important task for Kurdistan than economic emancipation of women. This can be achieved through the involvement of the Kurdish woman in handicraft production, through the skillful use of free female hands, who already have production skills, for the work of handicraft artels. To do this, it is necessary to revive, successfully developing before the war, carpet production and silk spinning and start organizing handicraft artels. The economic development of our Kurdistan and the inevitably associated cultural and political development of the Kurds, is of colossal importance, going beyond the Transcaucasia. the struggle against the old way of life, old family foundations, the already fully defined turning point in the position of women and her new role in economic and social life, testify to the fact that the life of Kurds and Kurdish women is taking on new forms. But new forms of life have not yet taken shape and the Kurdish family is going through a difficult transition period, which falls heavily on the shoulders of the Kurdish woman. That is why the main attention should be paid to it under the present conditions of work.