1. Country and population
The Azerbaijan Socialist Soviet Republic (ASSR) was formed from 2 provinces: b. The Russian Empire — the Baku and Elizabeth-Polish; from the south it directly borders with Persia, while the Turkish border runs extremely close to it. Azerbaijan, therefore, is a border member of our Union, bordering with two states of the Near East, on which the special attention of capitalist Europe is focused. At the same time, in terms of the ethnic composition of the population and culture, Azerbaijan is in close connection with Persia and Turkey. It is understandable, therefore, why the government of the USSR attaches such great importance to the building of national culture on the new Soviet base in the ASSR. After all, the imperialist states of Europe are interested in Persia and Turkey only from the point of view of the possibility of exploiting these countries as semi-colonies; they carry there economic and political enslavement, which is a heavy burden on the working masses of the population. The imperialists incite national enmity in the East, so that the easier it is to consolidate their rule there. The Soviet Union, on the other hand, is a natural friend of the people of the East, a friend who shows them the way to genuine liberation from foreign oppression. In particular, only the Soviet government was able to resolve the national question in Transcaucasia and thereby eliminate the difficult legacy of the tsarist government. In the same way, the emancipation of women, which is one of the most important tasks of cultural construction in the East, was put on solid foundations only under Soviet rule. a fairly large country: it stretches from north to south, along the shores of the Caspian Sea for 400 versts and 200 versts deep into the Caucasus, from east to west. Most of Azerbaijan is filled with mountains; along the entire length of the country passes the Main Caucasian ridge, from which numerous lower ridges branch off; only along the sea coast stretches a not very wide plain, sometimes completely disappearing, sometimes expanding by 30-40 versts. Not far from the Persian borders, this plain wedges into the mountains with a long tongue along the valley of the largest river in the Caucasus, the Kura, which at this point flows into the Caspian Sea; this plain along the lower course of the Kura is called the Mugan steppe and is the richest territory in which cotton is very good at birth. The seaside plain is the hottest part of Azerbaijan; here for at least half a year — from May to October there is a strong heat. This hot plain is partly covered with lush vegetation, but for the most part it is a dry steppe and even a real desert <scorched by the sun, devoid of fresh water; the wells dug here collect salt water. Rough mountain rivers, running down from the snowy mountains to the sea, cross this plain in some places, and these areas are covered with rich vegetation. The forests are especially luxurious in the very south of Azerbaijan, near the borders of Persia, in the region of the seaside town of Lankaran. Mugan steppe is rather wide, especially closer to the sea; here the flat steppe spreads for several tens of versts. These places are rainless and during 3-4 summer months, another year, not a drop of rain will fall; river water irrigates only a narrow strip along the banks, and in the rest of the steppe everything burns out from the scorching summer sun; only the wind drives clouds of dust, and numerous snakes, lizards and all kinds of insects live and breed in the open. But in the winter half of the year, the Mugan steppe comes to life, low grass begins to turn green. Give in the summer here you can grow various useful plants that love strong sun and heat, for example, cotton; only canals should be diverted from the river and sown fields should be irrigated with them; these works require a lot of funds, but the costs are repaid a hundredfold; Therefore, the Soviet government is currently paying great attention to these works. In the mountainous part of Azerbaijan, numerous ridges run up, all the way up, to the Main Caucasian ridge covered with eternal snow and ice. The first rows of mountains are usually covered with dense forests; lower these forests are deciduous, on high ridges deciduous forests disappear and are replaced by conifers, even higher, near the snow, the forests completely disappear and here in the summer there are vast meadows covered with tall and luxurious grass, and even higher, all year round, everything is covered with snow and ice. In the mountains of Azerbaijan there is a long severe winter with snow and frost, and spring, and hot summer with rains and thunderstorms, and a rainy autumn. Such is the diversity of nature in different parts of Azerbaijan, and, of course, economic activities and everyday life of the population develop in different ways in different parts of the country. Azerbaijan is inhabited mainly by Turks or Tatars, accounting for about 56% of the total population; the remaining 40% are mainly Armenians (13%), Russians (7%), Persians and mountain tribes. Azerbaijani Turks are the closest relatives of Anatolian Turks; their language is also similar to Turkish, as, say, Great Russian to Ukrainian; the Crimean and Kazan Tatars are also the closest relatives of the Azerbaijani Turks. All these peoples have preserved great similarities in their way of life; all of them profess the Muslim religion, which still retains a strong influence among the dark masses. The main occupations of the Azerbaijani Turks are agriculture and cattle breeding. Before the Soviet coup, that is, until May 1920, about 20% of the best land belonged to the "beks" and "khans", the Turkic landowners who cruelly exploited the backward peasant masses. They levied all kinds of semi-feudal extortions from both farmers and herders; they often had a crowd of armed servants of the "nukers" and kept the surrounding villages at bay. These feudal relations were liquidated only after the establishment of Soviet power in Azerbaijan; at present, the Azerbaijani peasantry has quite stratified on the one hand, we observe a significant layer of strong farms, especially in areas of intensive crops (rice and orchards), where the profitability of the peasant farm is especially high; on the other hand, one can state a noticeable influx of proletarianized and semi-proletarianized Turkic peasantry into the cities (mainly in Baku); thus, we are currently witnessing the birth and initial development of the Turkic industrial proletariat. As for the countryside, there continues to exist, along with large kulak farms, and middle and poor farms; The conditions of the climate, soil and cultivated plants (for example, cotton in Mugan) allow these farms to firmly exist and develop, especially with the support of the agricultural cooperation "Azsoyuz". In Azerbaijan, the features of a nomadic cattle-breeding life are still preserved. All the Turkic peoples in the distant past roamed the boundless steppes of Asia, engaged in cattle breeding; part of the Azerbaijani Turks living in the dry coastal steppes and on Mugan still retained this way of life. Their main wealth is livestock, mainly small horned ones, the so-called "baranta"; they spend the winter half of the year in their winter camps "kishlags" on the coastal steppe lowland; in winter, under the influence of rains, rare fresh grass appears here, on which, although very scarcely, cattle can graze. Life is hard at this time of the year for the Turkic herders; they live in houses, somehow made of stones and clay; these houses are mostly without windows and consist of one room, if you can only call a small, low and dirty barn a room, where sometimes animals are placed with people; In the wet and cold weather, which so often happens in winter, all family members huddle in the saklya (the so-called living quarters in the Azerbaijani village) and spend many days in crowded and stuffy weather. There are no stoves in saklyas, and in one of the corners there is a fireplace, in which a fire is made, and the smoke goes out through the chimney; there is no firewood in the steppe and they are burning "dung", dried manure, and there is more smoke than fire; over the fire, like over a fire, pots are hung in which food is cooked, and here everyone is heated and dried. They eat very poorly in winter: "churek", thin and flat barley bread, and sheep's cheese; meat is seldom eaten on special occasions. All household work is carried out mainly by women: they look after the cattle and bake bread in "tandoor" - holes in the ground, at the bottom of which a fire is made and the walls are coated with clay; dough is glued to the walls, which is baked; they also make yarn, and fabric, and a dress for men - from sheep's wool. Men sometimes go with caravans to the city, but spend most of their time in idleness and in endless conversations with each other. But at the end of December or in January, men take up a home-made wooden plow, plow the neighboring rice. 1. Dwelling in a dry foothill strip with slag plots of steppe and sown with barley; by the end of April or in May, the barley usually ripens, and if the sowing does not burn out from the sun, which happens very often, then a meager harvest is removed. The Turkic cattle-breeder does not particularly count on this harvest; such agriculture is just an auxiliary occupation for him. But now the hard winter passes, the sun starts to heat up strongly, and in April the steppe turns green, but only for a very short time; in early May the grass burns out, and the cattle again have nothing to eat. Then all the villages are empty; each saklya loads all their belongings onto carts (2-wheeled carts harnessed by bulls or buffaloes) and set off for the mountains, where luxurious mountain meadows stretch near the snow. It is here that the pastoralists settle down for their summer living; men again indulge in complete idleness, and women are busy with the procurement of dairy products, which they will sell in the autumn to city buyers. This is how the life of the Turkic nomadic pastoralists proceeds, in their annual movements from the steppe plains to the high mountains and vice versa. Agricultural villages are located on the slopes of the mountains. At the very bottom, where it begins to slope up to the mountains, in the vicinity of a fast mountain river, there are vast rice fields, or "chaltyks", as they are called in Azerbaijan. Rice is a marsh plant in hot countries; crops must emerge under water, so rice fields are flooded for quite a long time; they are located along the slope, and water is diverted from mountain rivers by ditches, from which small grooves branch off, leading water to different parts of the field. The work to maintain this entire irrigation network requires a lot and very hard. All this hard agricultural work is done almost exclusively by women. The villages themselves are usually located near rice fields. In these villages, there are small orchards, and mulberry trees are planted near the houses and, again, women are engaged in silkworm breeding. Men, on the other hand, play the role of the main leaders of the economy and do very little field work; when the time comes for the sale of the harvest and other products of the economy, then the owner becomes a merchant, and for some time he has a great deal of care; but the days of trouble pass, and again the heads of farms and families gather in groups, drink strong tea, and, sucking on the shanks, have endless conversations. 

2. A group of Azerbaijani peasant women. High in the mountains, village life develops differently. Barley fields are sown around the village on more level ground; the harvest from them, as in the RSFSR, is removed not earlier than the middle of summer, and men also take part in agricultural work. They plow here with the most primitive plow, often made of two crossing branches; metal plows are rare. And other agricultural implements have survived unchanged from ancient times. But not only barley fields are the main wealth of the inhabitants in mountain villages; around the auls, in large areas, there are orchards, in which apples, pears, cherries, and quince grow as huge trees; many thousands of poods of various fruits are collected in autumn by each aul in these orchards, and these fruits are of very high quality. The lion's share of the labor of both tending the orchards and collecting fruit falls on women; they are also engaged in the procurement of dried fruits. But the mountain villages of Azerbaijan are famous not only for their fruits. Excellent carpets are made here by female hands. The extraordinary durability of colors, the beauty of their combinations and patterns brought world fame to these carpets. The main, absolutely predominant, urban center of Azerbaijan is, of course, Baku, with its almost half a million population and powerful industry. More than 100,000 mass of the proletariat is concentrated in Baku, and 44.5% of this proletariat is Russian. Strong isolation from the countryside contributed to the development of class self-awareness in it, and the Baku workers have always been at the forefront of the Russian labor movement. The first attempts at organized demonstrations date back to 1990, the 19th century, and in 1899, social democratic propaganda began among the Baku workers, which had significant success. The May Day demonstration of 1903 was attended by up to 10,000 workers, and in July of the same year a general strike broke out in Baku, which opened a new page in the Russian labor movement; in 1904, the second general strike, which led the workers to victory and to the partial recognition of their professional organization by the employers. From that time on, the strikes took on a revolutionary character: the organization of the Baku proletariat grew so much that not only entrepreneurs began to reckon with it, but in 1906–07. even the tsarist government. The subsequent years of reaction were unable to destroy the professional organization of the Baku workers, but only somewhat weakened it in 1913 and 1914. two grandiose general strikes flared up again, of a strikingly revolutionary character; the strike of 1914 was broken only by the outbreak of the world war. Between the end of 1918 and April 1920, during the domination of the national-bourgeois power of the Mussavat party in Azerbaijan, the Baku proletariat realized its class task and entered into a struggle against the Mussavat government, which relied on the imperialist bayonets of the British. The Baku workers maintained contact with Soviet Russia through Astrakhan; there were a lot of brave workers from among them, who delivered gasoline to Astrakhan on sailing boats by sea, breaking the blockade of the Denikin-British fleet; thanks to this assistance, the operation of airplanes and motor vehicles became possible in the Red Army. Many of these heroes died at their posts. Workers of the Baku coastal radio station kept in touch with Astrakhan and Moscow, every minute they risked being shot as spies. And when at the end of April 1920 the Red Army was still almost 200 versts from Baku, the Baku proletariat under the leadership of the Communist Party overthrew the power of the Mussavat government and on the radio asked the Council of People's Commissars of the RSFSR for help. Thus, thanks to the revolutionary organization of the Baku workers, Azerbaijan easily reunited with the Soviet Union. And during the years of revolutionary devastation, the Baku proletariat, under the leadership of engineers and workers' leaders closely united with it, quickly rebuilt the oil industry, realizing the enormity of the responsibility that lay on it. Now, alongside the Russian proletariat, the Turkic proletariat is gradually growing, which, joining the revolutionary traditions of the Baku workers, will revolutionize the life of the backward Turkic masses. The completion of this process is a matter for the future, but for now we are present at its very beginning. The county towns of Azerbaijan are small centers with a Turkic, predominantly, population. Often these towns are drowned in the greenery of luxurious orchards, which are the income of residents; nevertheless, their main economic base is small and medium-sized trade, which covers a fairly significant area of ​​neighboring auls. Such horticultural and shopping centers are Cuba, Shemakha, Nukha, Geokchay, Shusha, etc., and each of these cities is a base for agricultural cooperation. Mountains differ from these county towns. Ganja, the main industrial center of Azerbaijan after Baku. There are a number of factories for processing agricultural raw materials, and at present the government of the ASSR is building a large textile factory in Ganja. The bulk of the Ganja workers are the Turks, and the further development of Ganja as an industrial center will greatly contribute to the growth of the Turkic proletariat. As we can see, the Turkic urban population consists mainly of strata of the petty and middle bourgeoisie, in a certain respect even more inert than the peasantry; chador, for example, very little used in villages, is a law in urban centers. The cultural level of the Turkic mass is very low: literate in the village 2-30 / 0, in cities this percentage rises to 10-13%, women are illiterate by almost 100 %

2. An Azerbaijani woman in the past
The Azerbaijan SSR is a country in which in the past the religion of Islam reigned supreme over the masses. The Muslim religion concerns not only the religious needs of a person, but at the same time constitutes a law to which the civil and even state life of people is subject. The sacred book of Muslims "Koran", this is like a Muslim gospel, serves at the same time as a code of laws, according to to which they are judged and governed, despite the fact that the Koran was compiled 1300 years ago. Before the revolution, Russian officials ruled in the provinces of which the ASSR was composed; important cases among Muslims were decided by the royal government courts. Various small cases were decided by Muslim judges "qadis". But among these small cases were all cases related to Muslim marriage, divorce, in general, all relationships between a man and a woman. Thus, the position of a Muslim woman in present-day Azerbaijan before the revolution was entirely determined by the Muslim religion: the Koran and the interpretation of the Koran by Muslim legalists. The Russian government did not interfere in these matters. The Azerbaijani woman was suppressed by the age-old oppression not only of the Muslim religion, but also of the harsh local customs, the so-called "adats". What place in human society does the Muslim religion give to women? First of all, by the rules of this religion, a woman is doomed to a reclusive life, she becomes, as it were, an eternal captive of a man; on the street, she can only appear wrapped in a veil, which hides her face and figure from male gaze. In accordance with this, a woman, according to Muslim law, remains guarded by a man all her life, as if an eternal minor. If she has to participate in any transactions, then usually a male guarantor, some relative, acts on her behalf. The same deal is recognized for marriage, the main event in the life of a woman of the past. According to Muslim laws, marriage is the purchase of a wife by a man, and a woman is not always able to sell herself; she only has to express her consent to be a commodity in this transaction, and the sale itself is made on the part of the bride by the guarantor; this rule is especially observed when a girl is getting married. The girl can be sold 'to her future master husband even without her consent; her father, grandfather, in general, all older paternal relatives have the right to do so. The groom must pay the exact agreed amount of money to her parents or guardians for the bride to be bought, “kalym”, which means “ransom” in Turkic, while the bride is again given a precisely agreed dowry, mostly with various household items. In a word, a formal commercial transaction is made with witnesses, and sometimes without witnesses, and at the end of this transaction, the marriage is considered concluded; no religious rituals are relied upon. Muslim laws allow marriage between young children, even between babies; or between an adult, even an old man and a little girl; finally, marriages between old women and young men, even boys, are possible, but at the same time the spouses can begin their life together only after reaching puberty. A man can legally have no more than 4 wives at a time, but he can change his wives as much as he wants; he has only to tell his wife, "I let you go," and he is already divorced; after that he must return the dowry to his wife and maintain her for 2-3 months. But the wife, with the exception of a few strictly defined cases, cannot demand a divorce. These were the main laws under which Azerbaijani women spent their sad lives before the revolution. Both in the city and in the countryside, both the poor and the rich, they were either the joy or the working cattle of their ruler-husband. The very birth of a baby girl was met in a Turkic family in Azerbaijan with obvious displeasure: a girl is "someone else's product", and a "boy kindles the father's chiraq (hearth) ”- says an old saying of the Azerbaijani Turks. Usually the girl's childhood, especially in the village and among the poor strata of the urban population, was bleak and difficult. To begin with, the death of a baby girl in Turkic families, especially the poor, usually caused parents, not grief, but rather relief: “Glory to Allah that we lost not a boy, but a girl!” - parents were supposed to say in such cases. If the difficult living conditions of the Azerbaijani peasantry in the past did not allow parents to pay enough attention to their children at all, the girls grew up just like weeds. The cradle of the baby boy was looked after not only by the mother, but usually she was constantly surrounded by a whole swarm of female relatives; they protected him from evil spirits - "genies", from the evil eye, and for this they hung the boy's cradle with various things, which, in their opinion, had a special spellbinding power. The girl's cradle was not surrounded by any attention, and the child was sometimes allowed to scream for hours. Turkic lullabies for girls reflect well both a difficult childhood and a bleak future for women; here is one of them: Sleep, my daughter, bark, bark!) I sing My black-eyed, bark, bark I sing. Your eyes are black and a spot on your forehead: • I'm afraid that you don’t dress in black. Blood is oozing from my mother’s chest , Scarlet blood oozes to angry people for laughter. Sleep calmly, bark, bark, I sing. And on the roof of the sakli * 2 3) ravens flew, Black flew, foreshadowing evil; But the predatory kite scattered them all; Sleep peacefully, child; bark, bark, I sing. Mother will grow you up on the mountain: You will fall into the hands of an old hajji 3), You will dress up in velvet and brocade, You will entertain the old hajj-u. Now sleep well, bark, I sing. the future is predicted by the mother of her daughter in a lullaby: they will sell her in marriage to an old man and she will become his captive; in this song we feel all the grief of the downtrodden and disenfranchised mother. On the contrary, in lullabies for boys they sing about his happiness in the future, his mother calls him “aga,” that is, lord, "my padishah," he says that "the dust of your feet will be a sacrifice," and so on in the same way. We see that a mother has no rights even before her own child, a son. Boys were taught from a very early age that they were born masters of their sisters and of girls in general; therefore, it was always possible to see in the games of Turkic children how the boys tyrannized not only their peers, but also girls much older than themselves. And usually girls took such an attitude towards themselves as something indisputable and due. One Russian official describes such an incident in a mountain Turkic village: he wanted to caress a little girl who was crying bitterly; when he asked this girl why she was crying, the girl said through her tears: "I want to be a boy." How deeply this little creature must have felt his humiliated position in order to express such a peculiar protest! But such Protestants were, of course, rare; from infancy, a woman developed a sense of submissiveness to a man, even if he was a brother or even a peer of children's games. Since Muslim law allows the marriage of minors, concluded for them by their parents or guardians, in the Azerbaijani village it was often possible to meet 3-4-year-old husbands and wives, and the little ones "husbands" very harshly shouted at their "wives", took they have sweets, and the little "wives" with a sad awareness of the need submitted to this. When the girl grew up to 5-7 years old, she became a participant in all the household chores of her mother. In the Azerbaijani village, little girls always helped their mothers in all field and garden work, carried water from springs, which were often located far beyond the village. The spring is a women's club; when they come with jugs to fetch water, the Turk women chat about all their innermost family affairs, and the girls get used to comprehend the "secrets" of married life from early childhood. Girl's houses; they were also involved in work: they helped to light the "tandoor", cook, tinker with cattle; and the boys at this time enjoyed complete freedom, Amogli frolic, play, or they were sent, who could, to the mullahs, to learn to read and write. But this childhood did not last long for the Turks, when they could still run around the village in their free time and have fun. At the age of 10-11, a Turkic girl ceased to be a girl and was already considered a bride. The Türks, like most of the southern peoples, develop very early; especially this should be said about women who were not so rare mothers at the age of 12-13. And here is a 10-11-year-old girl-girl parents or guardians deprived her of her recent childish freedom. The captious supervision of all senior family members was established over her; She was tightly locked in 4 walls of her house and only occasionally could go out into the street, but she was certainly wrapped in a veil and accompanied by someone. When meeting a man, a girl had to stop, turn away and wait until the man passed. Under such conditions, there could be no question of any girlish love; the village boys believed that a girl who fell in love with someone at least once could continue to fall in love and get married and be a bad wife. So the girls lived locked up until they were sold for a more or less good "kalym" marriage. The parents of the groom and the bride persuaded about the conditions, then the father of the groom with the mullah came to the bride, brought the wrapped bride, Fig. 3. The Turkic girls at the "tandyr" (oven in the ground), the mullah asked her if she wanted to get married, and the whole ceremony ended with that. The girl was completely dumb in her choice of her husband: the slightest suspicion of her special inclination towards someone could completely ruin her reputation, the girl and herself; - “my daughter, I want to drink with water, I want to eat with bread,” the proverb said. According to Turkic concepts, a girl is “the product of her groom, and when the Turki wanted to ask about a girl whose bride she was, they always asked,“ whose product is she? ” The more beautiful it was, the more expensive it was sold; quite often it happened that a 12-13-year-old girl was sold for a good "kalym" to a 60-70-year-old village rich man. And if the "product" turned out to be spoiled, that is, if the girl turned out to be not innocent, then according to Azerbaijani customs, the husband could immediately kill her on the wedding night. Having married, a young woman was deprived of any freedom to dispose of herself; if she was locked up as a girl, although at home she felt relatively free and did not cover her face. Once in the house of her husband that was not hers, the newlywed had to cover her face with a "jasper" 1); she did not dare to speak to any member of the male family except her husband; even with little boys she could only explain herself with facial expressions; to say in Turkic about a young woman that she has an open face meant to call her immoral. In the face of her mother-in-law, the newlywed usually received a cruel jailer who watched her every step and action; under the captious supervision of her mother-in-law, a young woman had to do all the housework, and the slightest mistakes were punished cruelly, up to beatings. Only the birth of the first child liberated the woman somewhat; she opened her face (only at home, of course) and began to feel more independent. Childbearing is the main purpose of a woman according to Turkic views; only motherhood gave her some, albeit barely noticeable, rights; - “a barren woman and Allah is against it,” says one Turkic proverb; or— "a fertile hen, better than a barren woman." Therefore, the birth of a child, especially the first and especially a boy, was the greatest holiday in the life of a Turkic woman. But this most important event in her life was also a great test for her, meaning the Turk woman of the broad working masses. The pregnant * Turkic peasant woman continued to do her hard work until the very onset of childbirth; she hid her position from strangers for as long as possible, fearing that her enemies would plot all sorts of intrigues for the baby in the womb; in her deep darkness, the Türkic woman believed in all kinds of evil spirits "djins", in an evil eye, and so on; all these evil forces, in her opinion, could destroy the baby if the enemies incite them to him. Therefore, sometimes childbirth found a Turk woman in the field, and in the gardens, and in the steppe, and in the garden: hiding behind some bush, she was relieved of the burden with the help of her neighbors. There were also cases when childbirth occurred during the migration, the migration continued on its way, and the woman gave birth, going into the forest only in society and under the protection of a huge shepherd; a few hours later the woman in labor was catching up with the nomad, carrying her newborn in her arms; such cases did not surprise any of the nomads, and husbands did not even approach their wives in labor. But even at home, childbirth was not much better furnished, especially if it happened in winter. The Turks were superstitiously afraid of doctors, where they were, and some old woman played the role of a midwife. Mortality from childbirth under such conditions was very significant. Several days passed after childbirth and the woman began her usual work; moreover, where rice or cotton is cultivated, women had to work without straightening their backs all day; the newborn followed his mother everywhere: she tied him to her back and with him she chopped out cotton, repaired the irrigation ditches, etc. The mother was entirely responsible for taking care of the children; the father did not interfere at all. But all the rights to children under Muslim law belonged to the father. An Azeri Turkic peasant rarely had more than one wife, he usually took a second one for himself only if the first was childless; and in this case, he could always let his childless wife go by saying only the required words about divorce. If divorces did not happen so often in the Azerbaijani countryside, it was only because it was not profitable for the husband to lose the labor force in his household, from which point of view he looked primarily at his wife. But the position of a childless wife in the family was very difficult, she was deprived of even that small support that motherhood could give her; in fact, she was her husband's serf. The urban Turkic woman in Azerbaijan belonged almost exclusively to different strata of the Turkic bourgeoisie. The Turkic proletarian woman begins to appear only in our days, but she will be discussed below. If a city woman did not have to carry out such exhausting work as a country woman, then in the city she faced other dangers; especially if she belonged to the poor strata of the population: the city quickly corrupted girls and, as a result of their lack of rights, many of them easily ended up in brothels. In wealthier families, girls were sometimes given their own imaginative education: they were sent to study in schools held by female mullahs, where they were forced to cram the Koran for 2-3 years. But such education was the lot of very few women, and even in big cities there were no more than 2-3% of literate Turk women. This usually ended their education and they were kept locked up, preparing them for the future duties of a wife. They were married off as early as in the village, and the bride-girl also lived in a lock and did not have the opportunity to choose her husband. Even among the Muslim intelligentsia, where the FATHERS graduated from Fig. 4. Urban old woman-Turk Russian schools and universities, the position of daughters, by virtue of custom, nevertheless happened to be powerless; in the order of things, there were cases when Turk girls who graduated from gymnasiums and institutes in St. Petersburg were married to illiterate old millionaires, Baku Turks, and had to be covered with a veil. 3. Revolution and emancipation of the Azerbaijani Turk woman
In Azerbaijan, the October Revolution finally won only in May 1920. Immediately after the February revolution in Azerbaijan, as in the rest of Transcaucasia, the formation and strengthening of bourgeois-nationalist and chauvinist groups began; in Azerbaijan, the largest national group was the bourgeois-democratic party "Musavat" (Equality). This party played the role of national representation in the Transcaucasian Seim, which consisted mainly of Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries, Dashnaktsakans and Mussavatists; Thus, the Transcaucasian Seim was the supreme government of Transcaucasia, which did not recognize the October Revolution. Under the pressure of the Turks and ethnic strife, this Transcaucasian government fell, and 3 independent republics were formed in Transcaucasia: Azerbaijan, Georgia and Armenia. The Musavat Party, which was in relations with Turkey, formed the government of Azerbaijan, which was established in Ganja; Baku, with its revolutionary proletariat, joined the October coup and established Soviet power in the city and districts. But the position of this power was extremely difficult: the city was surrounded by enemies on all sides, with the Turkish army advancing on one side, the British command in the North. Persia sought to capture the city from another. The only connection with Soviet Russia was through Astrakhan, but this assistance was too distant. As a result of extreme food difficulties and a shortage of party workers, fermentation arose among the Baku proletariat and it succumbed to the English bait thrown from the North. Persia: On July 31, 1918, the Baku Council of People's Commissars resigned and power passed to the so-called "dictatorship of Tsentrokas-Piy", in which the Bolsheviks did not take part and which invited British military assistance against the Turks. The British sent help, but completely insufficient, and at the same time seized power in the Caspian Sea. The most prominent figures of the Soviet power were arrested and deceitfully sent to Krasnovodsk, which was then a real English port; On September 19, 1918, 26 Baku commissars, the most prominent representatives of the revolutionary Baku proletariat, were shot among the sands of the Trans-Caspian region. On September 15, 1918, the Turkish army took Baku, while British forces were hastily evacuated by sea. The Turks owned the city for the entire month of ID, as they had to clear the Transcaucasia by virtue of the armistice on the fronts of the world war (the Mudross armistice). Baku was again occupied by the British, this time for almost a year (until November 1919). Nominally, power was in the hands of the Mussavat government, in fact, the British command ruled, which was trying to establish a colonial regime in Azerbaijan; but it ran into the resistance of the Baku proletariat, which forced them to reckon with themselves. Since that time, the Baku proletariat maintains an underground connection with Soviet Russia, up to the moment when, after the departure of the British and the defeat of the volunteer army, they again proclaimed Soviet power in Baku on April 28, 1920. ) came face to face with enormous difficulties to pave the way for socialist construction in a country where the population continued to live according to Muslim laws and customs, where the female half of the population was almost in slavery to the male. The women's question has become and is in Azerbaijan not only as a question of cultural development, but also as one of the most important combat tasks of the revolution. But in carrying out these tasks, the Soviet government ran into enormous difficulties; the liberation of a Turk woman from the age-old oppression of a man is not only a struggle against the inertia of the masses, which, of course, is difficult in itself; but at the same time it is necessary to touch upon religious issues, since the disenfranchised position of women is, as we know, one of the main points of the teachings of the Muslim religion. To deprive a Turkic Muslim of his power over his wife and woman in general means taking away from him his age-old rights of owner; so that the resolution of the women's issue in Azerbaijan takes on the character of a profound social revolution. Under such conditions, the Azerbaijani government had to approach the resolution of this crucial issue with extreme caution. And it must be admitted that during 7 years of work the Soviet government managed to achieve a lot in this direction, taking into account the exceptional difficulty of the task. Gradually, after a series of discussions and disputes, laws are issued regulating family relations of the Turks, abolishing the previous Muslim laws and customs: prohibited polygamy is prohibited by law, early marriages are prohibited, so now in Azerbaijan a man can marry only after reaching the age of 18, a woman to marry 16 legal marriage is recognized only by a marriage concluded in the registry office in the same way as divorce is valid only then, when it is committed before the people's court. Thus, an Azerbaijani woman in her family relations is put in a position completely equal to a man by law, just like in her other civil rights. But these laws would remain a dead letter, and the Turkic woman herself would not dare to be released from male captivity, if the communist party, represented by the women's departments, did not come to her aid. The ALKSM organization also has a strong effect on the mass of Turkic women, drawing into its environment a significant number of Turkic girls, which process is especially noticeable in Baku, where students of Turkic youth are concentrated. The Turkic Komsomol women, extremely energetic and courageous by their national nature, strongly contribute to the destruction of inert relations in the Turkic family and the creation of the foundations of a new way of life. But it is not only in Baku that the Komsomol manifests its revolutionary activity; the same is happening in the counties, only on a more modest scale. The Zhenotdel under the Central Committee of the AKP scattered an extensive network of its branches throughout Azerbaijan, so that they are available not only in the district and volost centers, but even sometimes in remote auls. Zhenotdel is the real headquarters of the everyday revolution in Azerbaijan. He groups around himself in the localities all the more or less capable of social work Turk women and through them influences the inert female mass. The organizational work of women's departments in Azerbaijan is aimed, as elsewhere in the Soviet East, at creating the maximum possible maximum of women's delegate meetings; the female mass in the auls willingly gathers to promote more developed and energetic women from their midst; more or less systematic studies are being conducted with these delegates. Through these delegate meetings, the involvement of the Turkic women in the party and the Komsomol takes place. But this last process is proceeding very slowly: as of 1/1 1926, there were 1271 communists throughout Azerbaijan, of which 26.2% were Turk women. Azerbaijani women's departments strive to ensure that the Turkish women consider them "their" institutions, designed to alleviate the difficult conditions of their lives. This goal has now been achieved: in the most remote corners of a Turk woman willingly goes to the women's department to complain and consult: will her husband beat her, take a second wife bypassing the law, whether her husband or relative violates the woman's legal property rights - in all such cases, the Turk women know the way well to the women's department. Thanks to this, the actual position of a Turk woman in the family has improved, men are afraid of women's departments and, according to general reviews, behave much more modestly in family life. But in order to correctly understand the current position of an Azerbaijani woman, one must always remember what her position was before the revolution, what was then the general cultural position of the masses in Azerbaijan. It is especially difficult for a Turkic man to give up his position as master in the family, and therefore now very often one can hear in the Azerbaijani village the opinion that the whole revolution is being done for the sake of women. This circumstance shows how the female mass has stirred up, but at the same time it also speaks of what a strong opposition to the liberation of the Turk woman the backward male mass has. The backward parts of this mass prevent their wives from freely leaving the house, let alone participating in public life. It is extremely difficult for a Turk woman to fight for her rights, because for the most part she is deeply ignorant, accustomed by her past upbringing to slavish obedience to a man and crushed by the burden of masterful labor, which still rests entirely on her shoulders. In an Azerbaijani village, a man continues to be the king in his household and family, and therefore, there are still cases when the Turks, contrary to the law, have two wives: the husband divorces his former wife in court, with whom - [the second he lived according to Muslim law, and registers with a new wife; and the former wife remains to live with him on the same basis, according to Muslim law; the former wife has nowhere to go, since the main mass of the village society would be sharply against her if she took it into her head to fight for her rights as an actual wife. In the wilderness of Azerbaijan, the former customs are still very strong, and women's departments have to adapt to this environment in their work; Not long ago, the Russian chairwoman of the women's department in Nukha had to walk around the bazaar in a veil so that the local Muslim society would consider her a "decent" woman and would be easier to admit into their midst. These facts make it possible to feel the full force of the resistance that the centuries-old heritage of the past has put up among the masses to build a new life in Azerbaijan; After all, most of the modern adult generation was brought up and raised in those conditions of impenetrable darkness in which the old regime kept the Turkic people. But, as already mentioned, the mass of Azerbaijani Turks was stirred up thanks to the energetic work of the women's departments. In 1925, there were “peasant women’s corners” and women's clubs with 1080 members under 18 volunteer committees. Such a women's club in the wilderness of the county, of course, has a considerable revolutionary influence on the female mass; of course, the total number of permanent members of these clubs, as we see, is very small; but many Turkic women attend clubs without, however, becoming members. These clubs meet the ever-present need of village Turks for women's gatherings. Previously, such meetings took place only in winter, when women were somewhat relieved of heavy and continuous economic work, and the meeting place for neighbors was usually someone's warm stable. Now the village women's club not only can satisfy the need for entertainment, but there you can learn many useful and interesting things, for example, sewing on a typewriter, which is a great and tempting rarity in the county wilderness. Moreover, the clubs have organized educational centers and self-education circles in some places; in 1924-25, their number reached 34 with 479 participants; of course, these figures are negligible, the more so as in a qualitative respect these circles are very low; but, firstly, in a given cultural and everyday situation, the beginning cannot be different; secondly, the very fact, or better to say, the possibility of the emergence of a self-education circle for Turkic women-peasants, signals the onset of a genuine everyday revolution in the Turkic mass. The fact of the active participation of the village Turk woman in political life speaks about this and with much more expressiveness. As a result of the work of the women's departments, the Turkish women began not only to feel their civil rights, but also began to make timid attempts to exercise these rights; from 1923-24 the women's departments succeeded in organizing separate women's gatherings both for elections to village councils and for pre-election campaigning; since then, a kind of female "curia" has appeared in the Azerbaijani countryside, which by its existence perfectly describes the stubborn struggle of the past with the present; as we can see, the Turk woman still does not dare to step over the threshold of the room where men gather, but at the same time, having already realized herself as a Soviet citizen, she acts as her separate female group. It is interesting that these women's assemblies elected delegates to the village councils, and at present, 13.6% of all members of the village councils of Azerbaijan are Turk women; there were about 6,000 Azerbaijani peasant women who not only passively, so to speak, under the protection of the women's department, acted in the social and political field, but were not afraid to actively join the male, mainly, collective of the village council. Moreover, starting from 1925, we see Turkish women as chairpersons of village councils; in 1925 there were 5 of them, in 1926 — 12, and finally in the current 1927 — 21. It is quite remarkable that at the re-elections of the village councils this year, for the first time in pre-election and election meetings, both men and women participated together, there were no separate women's meetings, and the female mass was very active: out of 455,000 women electors, 130,000 participated in the elections. , i.e. 28%; in individual counties, this percentage increased to 75%, as was the case in the Kurdistan Region; a Kurdish woman, even before the revolution, was distinguished by great independence, while the revolution gave her the opportunity to legitimize and develop her freedom; in Kurdistan village councils, about 1/3 of all members are women. These figures, after all that we talked about the complete oppression and oppression of the Turk women in the recent past, may cause some surprise, it may seem that the Azerbaijani Turk woman has already achieved emancipation, that she is freer and more conscious than even the Russian peasant woman. But such an impression would be deeply mistaken; the election campaign represents an extremely convenient moment when women's departments can develop the maximum of their organizational energy and push the female mass to collectively defend their rights. But as soon as the Turk women return to their own hearth and work, they immediately fall under the powerful influence of the established domestic relations and the way of life at home - in everyday life, the dominant position is still held by a man. Of course, every such election does not pass without leaving a trace, they serve as a great socio-political school for Turk women; but social and political education in the given conditions is a slow and long process, and at present we are present only at its very beginning. So, over the past 7 years of Soviet power in Azerbaijan, a major shift has taken place in the everyday and social situation of a Turkic peasant woman; not only improved her position in the family, but thanks to the work of the women's departments, as well as due to the changed conditions of national economic life (elimination of landlord ownership, • cooperation, state regulation of land use,) she firmly embarked on the path of social and political education, which will lead her to de facto equality with men. In the urban centers of Azerbaijan, and first of all in Baku, the process of emancipation of the Turk woman is much brighter. In the Baku fishing and factory district we observe the emergence of the Turkic industrial proletariat, and along with the Turkic proletarian, the Turkic proletarian also appeared. At the large cotton factory named after Lenin (formerly Tagiyev) there are over 300 female Turk women, including a significant number of single familyless women; at the factory there is a women's club, liqpots, which are visited not only by female workers, but also by Turk women - the wives of workers who live right there in the factory village. Thus, the factory to them. Lenin square in Baku, with its predominantly Turkic composition of workers and employees, is the main center for the formation of an independent Turk woman of the future Turkic proletarian. An important role in the social education of a Turk woman is played by the club named after A. Ali-Bayramova. Itself |) the appearance of the building, as it were, indicates the significance that the women's issue has for Azerbaijan; this is the palace of one of the former Baku oil kings-millionaires, one of the most luxurious buildings in the city. All responsible administrators of the club are educated Turk women, with great love and skill in their work. The club has 1,400 permanent members of the Turks, at the age of 25-40, that is, the overwhelming majority of members of the club are Turks of the old generation; female youth in the city, attending schools and stages and universities no longer need a special women's club, but this youth will be discussed below. Among the members of Ali-Bayramov's club, housewives predominate who seek to acquire some kind of practical knowledge in the club or generally broaden their horizons; it is interesting to note that the club is also attractive for the backward Turk women, for whom the old customs are still of great importance: about a quarter of the club members do not dare to part with the veil; They go to the club, they are looking for new, better living conditions, but the fear and obedience of a man sucked in with mother's milk are not so easy to overcome. The club has several courses and schools in which 800 members of the club study. Vocational training comes first here; first of all, it is necessary to mention the large sewing workshop, where about 200 women are trained to sew on a sewing machine. In a huge bright hall a mass of Turk women are sitting and working diligently and merrily; they cover the army, the militia, and generally carry out government orders; Among the workers there are also Turk women from the counties, from where they are delegated by local organizations. This workshop also brings income and serves, of course, as a school of new life for women who have thus far spent their entire lives within the four walls of their city home. Further, the club has organized schools for the eradication of illiteracy, in which 660 women study; there is no need to say much about the significance of this fact, if we remember that the mass of adult Turk women is almost 100% illiterate. The introduction of the new Turkic alphabet, which is much easier to learn than a complex Arabic alphabet, should strongly push the elimination of illiteracy among Turkic women. Much attention is drawn to the vocational school, where training in handicrafts, handicrafts and applied arts is excellently delivered; at the school there is a permanent exhibition of student works, by which one can judge what great artistic abilities the Turk women have; beautiful small rugs, embroidery with wonderful combinations of colors, painted wood carvings, artistically processed clay jugs and vases — in all these works you see not blindly following the teacher's instructions, but often independent creativity. Thus, Turk women who have passed technical training at the club get the opportunity to earn money on their own and thereby strengthen the independence of their position in the family. Another type of vocational education at the club is courses for sisters of mercy; some general education is required to enter these courses, and such Turk women are among the club members; among them are also those who receive this general education, studying general education subjects in the same courses. Currently, 8 Turkish women have completed courses and are working in hospitals. On the same basis, there is also an obstetric technical school at the club, which has also given a number of trained Turkish midwives. This technical school is of particular importance for an Azerbaijani woman, since a Turkic woman is still deprived of medical care during childbirth, not only in the villages, but also in the city, where, in the absence of Turkish midwives, for the most part, they make do with home-grown midwives. Turkish midwives will not only improve the situation of women in labor; the appearance in the matrimonial bedroom of an independent Turkic woman as an authoritative person should greatly contribute to the everyday liberation of a Turkic woman, should strike a strong blow to the old masculine views of a woman as a lower powerless being. Many members of the club, having passed some, so to speak, social experience there, strive to get a job somewhere and thus obtain independence of position; the club, of course, supports such aspirations with all its might and at present it has nominated 34 of its members to serve in the telegraph and central telephone exchange, who are doing an excellent job of their duties. In addition, over 100 members of the club are employed in production as unskilled workers; they are all familyless, living alone and enjoying the support and protection of the club. These last Turk women have already completely got rid of male custody and are creating the life of a new Turkic woman, equal with a man. Several of them are already chairmen and members of factory committees, which gives an indicator of their significant professional and social activity.But the club also comes to the aid of a family worker from Turkey by setting up a nursery, where many mothers take their children for a day; These creches are really set up in an exemplary manner, and the mothers of Turks willingly work there in their free hours as nannies under the guidance of a pedologist. With these nurseries, the club provides not only material assistance to the Turk woman, but also awakens her public consciousness. From time to time, evenings and performances are organized in the club both on their own and with the participation of invited artists; these performances are very popular; initially, a mass of exclusively women, acquaintances and family members flocked to them; but gradually men appear among the guests, very often the husbands of the participants in the performances; Thus, the club not only works to free the Turk woman-wife, but also gives visual lessons on the new way of life for husbands. Ali-Bayramov's club, as mentioned, has several branches in the districts of Baku and is connected with women's clubs (“peasant women’s corners”) scattered around counties. The regional branches of the club (at the Lenin factory, in Kishly, in Akhmedlakh, etc.) are in closer contact with a Turk woman from a proletarian and almost proletarian environment. As a result of the hard work of the leaders of the clubs, it was possible to firmly establish the elimination of illiteracy (the Turks working there now agree to accept a man teacher, whom they previously refused to admit to their environment); little by little it is possible to involve the most developed female workers of Turks in social, trade union and, partly, in cooperative work; but, of course, this process is proceeding very slowly in quantitative terms. Among the institutions working on the emancipation of the Turk woman are the women's commissions under the AzCIK ("Azkomworkenits"); they organized a number of handicraft artels for women, of which hosiery workshops are especially successful. Women of all nationalities work in the workshops of "Azkomworkers", including women from Turks who find there an opportunity to earn money on their own. As elsewhere, the Komsomol plays a big and ever-increasing role in the process of liberating a Turkic woman, into which the most active young people of both sexes join. , we see that a strong organization has been created in the capital of Azerbaijan, which allows the older generation of Turks to gradually join social life, to get out of complete subordination to a man. Of course, Ali-Bayramov's club has a direct impact on a small, comparatively, part of the Baku Turk women, but it unites them into a strong nucleus, which strongly and the further, the more excites the inert female mass. We have spoken up to now about the modern Turkic woman who was brought up in conditions of the old regime and almost devoid of any kind of education. One of the main conditions for the creation of the next generations of a free and equal Turkic woman is the involvement of young women in the network of normal schools of the I and II levels. But these schools had to be created, and the Azerbaijani government ran into enormous difficulties in doing so; there was not enough teaching staff for the network of male Turkic schools, not to mention specifically female schools. But as a result of the seven-year work of the People's Commissariat for Education of the ASSR, great successes were achieved; at present (1927) there are 1,031 1st stage Turkic schools throughout Azerbaijan, in which 83,916 children of both sexes study, of which 70,012 are boys and 13,864 are girls, that is, 83.4% of the first and 16.6% of the second; training is now being conducted jointly. These figures speak for themselves, especially if we compare them with the situation that existed before the revolution, when the percentage of girls who received school education was almost zero. Of course, there is still a long way to universal primary education in Azerbaijan, but with regard to female education, the age-old wall of old prejudices has been broken. This fact is confirmed by the existence at present of 23 Turkic schools of the II stage with coeducation, with 2,217 students, of which 316, or 15 ° / 0, are girls. Here we are already witnessing an undoubted everyday revolution, although quantitatively and not particularly significant. Indeed, according to Muslim laws, grade II students would be considered to have fully reached the marriageable age and, therefore, spending time together would be considered the greatest debauchery and even a religious crime. But the Turkic girl moved not only to the schools of the first and second levels, she also went to the workers' school; at the Turkic branch of the Baku workers' faculty, out of 1.490 students from IZ, or 7.4% of women. Thus, a Turkic woman takes part in the creation of a new proletarian intelligentsia. The most remarkable thing is the aspiration of a Turkic girl to a higher school; 1.241 Turks are students in the universities of Azerbaijan, of which 332, or 26.9%, are Turks. The Turk woman, as we can see, is not limited to secondary school, but vigorously moves on; at the Azerbaijan State University, Turkish women are divided into faculties as follows: in the medical department - 62 people, in the east - 30 and at the pedagogical department - 22; it is interesting to note the prevailing interest in medicine as a specialty, which may be more than any other allows to influence the backward Turkic mass. The rest of the Turkic students work in other universities: in the higher art school, in the conservatory and in the Turkic pedagogical institute. In the higher school, the Turkic women feel completely free and study not lagging behind men; they not only end up as ordinary students, but several people have already emerged from among them, left at universities to prepare for professorship and scientific activity. This last circumstance and the general high prog center of Turkic women among university students eloquently show what rich cultural opportunities are hidden in the Turkic female mass. Despite the age-old isolation from social and intellectual life, the Turk women at the first opportunity brought forth cultural forces from their midst by hundreds and even thousands. It remains for us to sum up. The main Turkic mass in Azerbaijan lives in the countryside and small district centers. Muslim law and religion, old customs, "adats" still have a strong hold over this mass. Despite this, the downtrodden and humiliated Turk woman, thanks to the work of the women's departments, woke up and her situation improved. The old generation of Turkic women responded to the work of the women's departments and managed to distinguish from themselves a certain female “asset”. But in general, the old generation of Turk women still lives largely according to Muslim customs and experiences the care of a man, albeit in a weakened form. But the now rising female generation already belongs to the future; they go through schools and universities, women workers in all areas of national life come out of their ranks, and, of course, when they become masters of life, the shadow of the veiled Turk woman will finally disappear into the dark distance of her past. The literature on the situation of the Azeri Turk woman is very poor. In the past, there are interesting articles in "Collections for the description of tribes and localities of the Caucasus", ed. Lopatinsky, Zakharov's article is especially interesting there. There are currently several brochures in the Turkic language. The department of female workers at the Central Committee of the AKP publishes a special magazine dedicated to women's life “Shark-Kydyny” (in the Turkic language); prepares, as far as I know, for the release of the book of the head of the department of workers at TsKAKP Comrade. And sh-k about in about 5 years of work among the Turks. The pictures included in the brochure were taken from photographs by A. Alekperov.