1. General outline of the Mordovians
Mordva is the most numerous of the East Finnish tribes. It scattered over the vast expanse of the Middle Volga region and adjacent areas, and there is a lot of it in Siberia as a result of resettlement in search of better lands. However, the bulk of it is located in the middle Volga region (Gubernia Penza, Ulyanovsk, Saratov, Samara, Tambov, Nizhegorodskaya, Tatrespublyka) - in the places of its old settlements. This scattering leads to the fact that, despite its large numbers, the Mordovians do not constitute the majority in any province or even in the district. Here and there it is interspersed among the Russian population, and only in a few places does it form more significant groups — nair., In the Penza province. and in the Ulyanovsk (Ardatovsky u.) Therefore, the Mordovians do not have their own region, as we see with other national minorities, although they outnumber them; - in those places where it constitutes the bulk of the population, Mordovian volosts are organized, i.e. - e. smaller national units. In total, 1,340,000 Mordovians are considered in the USSR (census of 1926). The female sex predominates — there are 120-125 women per 100 men. Mordovia is divided into 2 large branches — the Moksha and Erzyan. The first prevails in Penza Gubernia, the second in Nizhny Novgorod and Ulyanovsk. In terms of numbers, Erzya slightly exceeds Moksha. Their linguistic differences are quite significant — they also differ in a number of everyday features. Erzya is mostly blond, while Moksha has a greater variety: along with blondes, brunettes with a dark skin color. In terms of their external life (buildings, clothes, etc.), the Mordovians are not so sharply different from the Russians - they are more other national minorities (it was subjected to Russification, scattered in small groups among the bulk of the Russian population. But nevertheless, in some places it still retained its original customs, especially this must be said about the Mordovians of the Penza province. This scattering has led to a significant variety of external life in different localities (for example, a variety of clothes, etc.). A number of everyday features, language - all this still fundamentally distinguishes the Mordovians from neighboring peoples. The initial settlements of the Mordovian people occupied the space between the Volga, Oka and Sura rivers, and from here, then under the pressure of the Russians, they were forced, gradually moving to the east, to settle in a wider area. They began at the beginning of the XII century. and the first time ended not in favor of the Russians. But over time, the pressure of the Russians became stronger and more energetic - they were attracted by the rich lands and forests occupied by the Mordovians and other peoples, and even more attracted by the great Volga route, along which there was a lively, large trade. In addition to the small number and fragmentation, the Mordovians were placed at a disadvantage in this struggle, due to the fact that they occupied an intermediate position all the time: first, between the Russians and the Bulgarians (a large trading state along the Volga and Kama before the Mongol invasion, that is, until the XIII century .), and then between Russians and Tatars. Thus, it was exerted, as it were, double pressure, and had to dodge between the two sides. But nevertheless, supported first by the Bulgarians, and then by the Tatars against the Russians, the Mordovians retained a certain independence, until the fall of Kazan. At the same time, Erzya had great independence, while Moksha, soon after the Tatar invasion, was forced to take into its environment a number of Tatar Murzas and princes who ruled over it. Erzya had her princes and fought with the Russians: with the help of the Tatars, for which she sometimes paid with cruel retribution from the Russians. But in general, the Mordovians, being quite peace-loving, most often tried not to enter the fight, hiding in the impenetrable forests of their region, but since they were compressed more and more tightly, they responded with a decisive struggle. But she still did not fight the Russians. It had enough strength, and during the conquest of Kazan, it peacefully submitted to the Moscow state. This subordination entailed, first of all, a decrease in the land holdings of the Mordovians. First, empty lands were taken from it, and then gradually cultivated, as well as forest possessions were taken away. the turn caused a change in the economic structure of the Mordovians. Having previously owned large forest areas, she was mainly engaged in hunting and beekeeping, although agriculture was quite developed. Hunting and beekeeping were now decreasing due to the fact that the Mordovians (Gradually lost their possessions. In addition, to the Mordovians a number of duties were imposed, the implementation of which was hard on the farm, and in addition, she was robbed Russian officials and clergy. It was easy for the latter to do this — the Mordovians did not know Russian laws, and their complaints were not taken into account. Mordovians carried out patrol service in the troops, under Peter I carried ship work, etc. In order to further weaken the Mordovians as a national whole, and break their resistance, which often manifested itself in bloody uprisings, she was forced to be baptized. Most often, it took place with the help of armed force, intimidation, and when this did not succeed, they were lured into being baptized with various benefits. Despite this, for a long time the Mordovians kept the pagan beliefs of their ancestors, and having adopted Christianity, they mixed it with these beliefs. On the basis of the forced conversion to Christianity, indignations of the Mordovians often occurred. One of these is known under the name of Teryu-shchevskogsgbunt (1743-44). Bishop Dmitry Sechenov (Nizhny Novgorod province) began to take too drastic measures to interbreed Mordovians and eradicate pagan rites. He began to destroy the Mordovian cemeteries, which they consider the most sacred, since they have a highly developed veneration of their ancestors, as well as Mordovian prayers (places for pagan prayers). At the same time, he used force and deliberately set the Russians against the Mordovians. The Mordovians who had suffered until now put up resistance. The military was called in. Mordovians scattered across the forests, leaving both property and bread in the fields. The team was instructed: "If they do not get baptized, catch them, whip them Mercilessly and baptize them involuntarily." But the Mordovians did not leave the forests until the onset of the winter cold. The cold, inevitably, drove her to her native places, occupied by soldiers and completely ruined. Even more irritated by this devastation, the Mordovians begin to join the troops in real battles, in one of which only 74 people were killed. After the uprising was pacified, part of the Mordovians was sent to Nizhny for reprisals. To clarify the methods of baptism, the complaint of the Mordovians, which they wrote to Sechenov, is interesting. It indicated that they were being held in chains, tortured and tortured in all possible ways, just to obtain consent to baptism. Mordva, in turn, answered: "We will all die at the same time, but we will not allow ourselves to be baptized." However, the force did its thing — not the priests, so the gendarmes and the soldiers christened the Mordovians. The latter, therefore, especially hated priests and officials, and in her uprisings hurried to deal with them. The uprisings of the Mordovians were thus caused by a general policy of oppression, its landlessness, and various oppressions that undermined at (the end of its economy. In the Time of Troubles (early 17th century), the Mordovians formed a special army under the command of their elected people, Moskov and Vokardin, and approached Nizhniy Novgorod. The latter has long been the mainstay of Russian rule in the Mordovian region, and against this point Mordovians directed their efforts, hoping in the person of him to break the Russian power in general. But they did not succeed in taking Nizhniy, they limited themselves to the devastation of the environs. The land was ablaze with uprising. Mordovians, of course, did not think about either Shuisky or the impostor, she fought for the lands taken from her, for her freedom — against Russian power in general. On the basis of these demands, the Mordovians united with the Chuvash and Cheremis and stubbornly fought against Taking Alatyr, first of all, they destroyed the hated (monastery and drowned the governor and the hegumen in Sura, and when the monks chose the second hegumen but, he suffered the same fate, the third chosen one was thrown from the tower, and at the same time the monks were dispersed so that no more elections could be made. The same was done with officials. The governors, in turn, took revenge on the rebellious Mordovians cruelly. In one report about a major battle with the Mordovians, Cheremis and Chuvash, voivode Sheremetev, intoxicated by victory over the rebels, writes: “they trampled on and! and they stabbed that pigs, and their corpses were laid seven miles away. " The revolt of the Mordovians, then subsiding, then renewing, continued until 1615. After the Time of Troubles, the situation of the Mordovian people deteriorated even more. A whole series of new taxes, new duties, and with them restrictions forced a lot of Mordovians to scatter "wherever they look," into the forests, etc. Since that time, the desire for resettlement begins. We have already talked about how they were converted to Christianity at that time. All this again caused unrest and uprisings that broke out here and there — the discontent of the Mordovians did not stop. And now, during the Razin uprising, she again rises without exception, makes up detachments under the command of either the Razin people or her elected officials and begins the struggle for liberation from unbearable oppression. The governors who pacified the rebellion had to endure especially fierce battles in the Mordovian areas, where the detachments of the rebels reached several thousand people. A lot of people were killed, a lot of villages were burned out and ravaged, and gallows were placed along the roads, on which the hanged people swayed “for edification.” The same thing happened in the Pugachev region. Mordva joined the rebels, fighting the autocracy, clergy and bureaucracy. In one place. Mordovians asked Pugachev for permission to return them to his Mordovian thief, having previously destroyed the churches. It should be noted that the majority of the Mordovians were state peasants, there were few landowners among them — they belonged directly to the Romanovs' house, therefore their indignation was always directed against representatives of the autocracy in the localities — officials and clergy. After the Pugachevism among the Mordovians, desperate to achieve anything through an open struggle with the autocracy, other moods arise, pouring out into religious utopian movements. Deprived of their lands, their former independence, oppressed at every step and not seeing salvation in their own strength, the Mordovians begin to wait for salvation from somewhere above, in addition to their own forces. At the beginning of the XIX century. this resulted in an interesting movement known as the sermon of Kuzma Alekseev, the prophet of the Mordovians - Teryukhan, which, of course, was the result of the same economic and political enslavement. Kuzma preached that the day will come when the Mordovians will again become a great people, and the Mordovian law and faith will rule over the whole earth. Kuzma's sermon found a warm response among the exhausted Mordovians, and Mordovians flocked from all sides to listen to their prophet. But the government did not like this, although the movement was peaceful. The leaders of the movement were captured, and reprisals were perpetrated against them, and the movement itself was presented as a fanaticism that almost reached the level of human sacrifice. Subsequently, the discontent of the Mordovians manifested itself in exactly this two ways. On the one hand, it had a peaceful and religious character: among the Mordovians, various sects began to spread extremely widely ("God's people", etc.), where they were seeking liberation from life's hardships in a departure from reality to religion. On the other hand, the Mordovians, along with the Russian peasantry, participated in a number of peasant movements, in the revolutions of 1905 and 1917. The revolution of 1905 caused, for example, extremely strong uprisings in the Saratov province. ! and other places. From the Mordovians, more from the intelligentsia, even before 1917 a number of active party workers emerged. In 1905, there was even an attempt to declare an independent Mordovian republic. Unfortunately, we do not have detailed materials on this interesting case. In the October Revolution, the Mordovians took a very active part. From among them, cadres of responsible workers and fighters of the revolution were immediately promoted. It can be said without exaggeration that in districts with a Mordovian population, the demands of the revolution (tax in kind, the fight against whites, etc.) were much better fulfilled. At the same time, the cultural and economic growth of the Mordovians began. Back in 1917, the Mordovian cultural and educational society was organized. After the October Revolution, the growth of the class consciousness of the Mordovian peasantry begins, expressed, as we have already said, in supporting the revolution with everything that the peasantry could give it, in the growth of political, educational and cultural ones. I can point to the example of Ardatovskiy u., Ulyanovsk province, where I spent the years of the revolution (muzzles, population about 500/0) institutions. Where there was a significant Mordovian population, the Mordovians for the first time had the opportunity to take part in government, and if earlier the Mordovians were afraid to approach institutions even close, then after the October Revolution we see its representatives in the councils, courts and other authorities. In the Mordovian villages, committees of the poor, party cells are organized, and for the first time the organized Mordovian poor get the opportunity to solve pressing issues themselves.! Mordovian departments are organized under the People's Commissariat of Education, then the People's Commissariat of Education, under the gubernias and other institutions. As in the entire Volga region, the Mordovians were also affected the famine of 1921 and the civil war, which in many cases affected the Mordovian regions, the more so that the main occupation of the Mordovians is agriculture (98% of the Mordovians are engaged in agriculture). The economy of the Mordovians experienced significant upheavals in those years, and efforts were spent in the subsequent years to overcome them. It is still generally accepted that the Mordovians have significant economic advantages. As proof of this, they are smeared with her lower debt and more serviceable payment of taxes and taxes (in pre-revolutionary (time). This is true only for the last statement. For hundreds of years, the intimidated and oppressed Mordovians got used to fulfill all requirements and duties to avoid repression, no matter how It must also be said that the Mordovians, being a stubborn and good worker, often, of course, achieved better results in agriculture. Meanwhile, her land allotments are no more than the allotments of Russian peasants. If we take the figures for 1925, then for the Penza province The Mordovians have 1.39 dessiatines per eater, while the Russians have 1.73 dessiatines.The Mordovians are provided with livestock somewhat better than the Russian peasants, but they lagged behind in the use of improved agricultural implements. its land holdings are significantly decreasing (in 1866 — there were slightly more P / a dess. per capita — now 1.39). The result of this in the past was widespread resettlement among the Mordovians. However, it doesn't help much either. At present, the question is being raised of improving the quality of cultivation "of the land, so that it can achieve greater results on the same area. Something has already been done in this direction. The area of ​​industrial crops is increasing, early fallow, multi-field is introduced, the quality of seeds is improving, etc. Since the Mordovian village has lagged significantly behind, these innovations are still hard to graft. To defeat this is carried out considerable agitation for the improvement of agriculture — through the release of rural households. leaflets in the Mordovian language, promotion of agricultural exhibitions to the masses, organization of rural households. courses and devices of agronomic lectures. Thus, only at the present time is the question of improving the economy of the Mordovian peasants being raised, and much has already been achieved in this regard. In areas of dense Mordovian settlements, there is no developed industry. Mordovians are exclusively peasants, but they are also engaged in side-trades, which are quite common. The Mordovians do not have workers as an organized mass, but many of them work in production as scattered units — of course, they quickly collapse under such conditions. | In serfdom, the Mordovians were sometimes assigned to work at certain factories — most of all potash. Many Mordovians went to the barge haulers, were engaged in cabbies, etc. Thus, the Mordovians have to be regarded as exclusively 'the peasant mass ;, with quite developed, in places, handicraft and seasonal trades. It must be said that the land relations of the Mordovians do not differ much from those of the Russian peasantry. In everyday life, there are significant remnants of the family life (affecting, for example, in the veneration of the elderly and especially the dead). The historical conditions of the existence of the Mordovians as an oppressed and exploited, downtrodden people for several centuries were reflected in its cultural state. Culturally, the Mordovians lagged behind significantly. Even the literacy of Mordovian men is much lower than that of Russians. In pre-revolutionary times, Mordovians had few opportunities to study. Not to mention the extremely small number of schools in the Mordovian regions, these schools themselves, with compulsory teaching in Russian, were hardly accessible to Mordovians, most of whom did not understand Russian. The enlightenment of the Mordovians began only after the October Revolution. Despite all the difficulties, the number of Mordovian schools has already been increased so much that, for example, in the Penza province. of all school-age children, 48% are enrolled in schools. The population itself is showing a growing desire for education, which became close to them after the revolution thanks to the introduction of teaching in their native (Mordovian) language. Only after the October Revolution did the Mordovians receive a textbook in the Mordovian language — before the revolution, and there were only a few dozen skinny brochures, and even then, devoted to the lives of the saints and church issues. Not only primary, but also secondary, higher education has now become available to Mordovians. Special Mordovian groups are organized at the second level schools, secondary schools are being opened in the Mordovian regions; In addition, there are several Mordovian pedagogical schools, the purpose of which is to prepare teachers for Mordovian schools, since there are very few of them. The Mordovians were also poorly provided with medical assistance in pre-revolutionary times. She needed her most of all, since the conditions of her life caused a wide spread of a number of diseases (trachoma, syphilis, etc.). The elimination of these diseases requires first of all the improvement of the life of the Mordovians, first of all, its economic and cultural condition. Currently, vigorous work is underway to provide Mordovians with medical care. The constant increase in hospitals and medical centers, the organization of special eye and venereal disease teams are already yielding significant results. -In addition, a large cult.-educational work is being carried out along this line, since various "grandmothers", midwives and sorcerers still enjoy significant sympathies of the Mordovians. Together with the clergy, they held the Mordovians in their hands for a long time and are now still fighting for their influence. Much still needs to be done to finally defeat the legacy of the past. The task is facilitated by the fact that the Mordovians themselves begin to feel interested in building their own economy and culture. Until now, significant work has been done to bring the bodies of Soviet power, schools, hospitals and other institutions closer to the mass of the Mordovian population. With the scattered Mordovian population, it could not create an autonomous group. However, the number of Mordovians is significant, and her life and skills are so different from the Russians that it was necessary to create some kind of national-Mordovian administrative units. A way out was found through the organization of Mordovian volosts in those areas where the Mordovian population represents groups concentrated in one locality. At present, a number of such volosts have already been formed. In addition, in part of the district councils and village councils, office work was translated into the Mordovian language, which immediately brought them closer to the Mordovian population. The same is being done with regard to judicial and investigative institutions. In connection with these events, the activity of the Mordovian population in public life has significantly increased. This is reflected in the increase in Mordovians in the composition of Soviet institutions. The number of Mordovians - council members in Penza. lips. almost corresponds to the percentage of the Mordovian and Russian population. The cooperation of the Mordovian population is being carried out, and although the cooperation has not yet reached the same results, as we see in areas with a Russian population, but nevertheless it is possible to note significant successes in this direction, especially in the field of rural households. credit cooperation. All this shows how the social skills of the Mordovians are growing. If earlier only a few brochures were published in the Mordovian language, the content of which has already been mentioned, now there are 4 Mordovian newspapers (in the Erzyan and Mokshan dialects), the content of which is designed for the masses of Mordovian peasants , and in addition, a number of Mordovka textbooks and books are published annually, which highlight the pressing issues of our time and issues of the peasant economy and everyday life. Mordovian youth, studying in universities and other educational institutions, and the Mordovian intelligentsia as a whole are enthusiastically working to raise the cultural level of Mordovians. Mordovian folk art is being collected, there are already excellent collections on ethnography and the life of the Mordovians in a number of museums (Penza, Ulyanovsk, etc.), performances are being carried out in the Mordovian language, etc., etc. All this clearly speaks for that that the Mordovians are on the eve of an economic and national-cultural upsurge, which we already feel now, and that hundreds of years of oppression could not break this people, who had endured a lot on their shoulders and only [now (having the opportunity to walk with quick steps to improve its existence.
2. Life of Mordovia before the revolution
A Mordovian woman in all respects was placed in a worse position than a man or a Russian woman, although it cannot be said that she was in the position of a man's slave. Men are quite attentive to her. In family matters, she always has her own opinion, which is considered, and she has a significant influence on all issues related to family life. The respect of the Mordovians for women is evident in their work. According to their tales, a woman can stop even robbers from committing a crime. A woman in the old days, when pagan beliefs were strong among the Mordovians, could even perform priestly duties. But along with this, such a mass of work piled on her, which did not give her the opportunity to go beyond the 4 walls of her hut. Acad. Shakhmatov in his "Ethnographic collection" gives a very interesting story of the Mordovians of Saratov, province, which perfectly characterizes the position of the Mordovian woman in the old days: “This is how we lived: we will sow hemp and weave bast shoes for women; and then she both knows and trades; Let him not ask anything from us, but give us trousers, shirts, footcloths, mittens, and stockings, and even sheepskin, they will wear us, and we will cut the spring harvest, and she will dress your children, and she will equip your daughter. And the equipment required a lot. As soon as they give birth, they give, when they give birth, they give. That is why they lived in girls. You yourself think, you are a smart person, how much a girl needs to cook, but think about when to cook; for a woman reaps with us all summer, threshes all winter; you cannot thresh during the thaw, she weaves canvas; but think about it, when does she spin? After all, hemp must be cooked: first tug, then rot, then crush, then cut, and only then spin; Yes, do your household chores: heat the stove, feed the chickens and pigs. Then the women lived like this: they did not lie down while spinning, but she would spin, spin and sleep while sitting; the other still has many children; keep up with it. These things were all theirs, and the peasants had a lot of things to do. All winter we carry, and throughout the summer we work in the field. And the young woman who will be married from us will not see her father-in-law barefoot] for three years. And the young woman, until she is born, does not sit down at the table, but eats while standing; He gives everyone a drink, and let him eat. ”Already from this story, which shows us the life of a Mordovian woman in her everyday life, one can conclude how hard this life was. Starting from childhood, she is full of work, and there is no time to think about study or take any part in life outside the walls of the house. Girls, almost as a rule, were not sent to school. The literacy of Mordovians is still much lower than the literacy of Russians and Tartars (in Penza province — 3.6%, in Ulyanovsk — 3.1%, in Samara — 6.9%, etc.). The girl's teaching consisted in helping her mother in domestic and then field work, as well as in teaching the "female craft" - sewing and decorating clothes. Mordovians are very fond of these ornaments, often very complex and requiring a lot of work and art. This is especially true for Erzyan women with their pulagai (back), decorated with fringes and beads. When walking, it makes noise and sways in all directions with its beaded tips. In addition, embroidering shirts, caftans, as well as a headdress (kokoshnik or magpie) —all this is a lot of work on the accessories of a rather complex Mordovian dress. Of course, for a more skillful preparation of jewelry, a rather long training is required, and this is one of the main occupations of a Mordovian girl. She not only needs to prepare clothes and jewelry for her family, but also make a reserve for a dowry (x). If the girl has free time, then she spends it at a kind of "get-together" or on the street. Gatherings even before the present!) I must say that learning needlework now takes up less space than before. time is very common in a number of Mordovian regions, but they are carefully hidden by young people. For such gatherings, they hire or simply find some secluded place, in most cases baths (x), where they spend time in games, courtship, and sometimes less innocent activities. Gatherings are, of course, a significant evil. Young people spend whole evenings (and sometimes nights) in a stuffy and stale air, receiving nothing but the danger of infection. In some places, Mordovians have special girls' holidays (like the Chuvash ones). Girls gather, buy food and feast, sometimes they invite guys too. In the latter case, the purpose of the holiday is to choose future wives and, in general, to introduce young people to each other. But now girlhood ends, and it's time to get married. Previously, this age came later. Girls aged twenty-three and twenty-five were married to boys aged 10-12. There is no doubt that this was caused by a number of conditions, primarily economic ones. The girl was appreciated as a worker and was hired in her prime, while her “husband”, while she worked, ran with the children through the streets. A similar custom was often practiced by landowners. About this so says the Mordovians: “The Archilov peasants did not marry the boys themselves, but they were forced by the master. And the master forced the boys to marry, that's why: a guy, girl, widower or widow cannot be imposed a whole dues, but a rolobrok; and if a guy or a widower gets married, then they put a whole share (work) on them. Therefore, the master married the boys, so that in some places they are called "baths". as many shares as possible would work for him. " On this basis, daughters-in-law developed significantly. At present, this custom has been obsolete, but the memories of it, preserved among the Mordovians, speak of its widespread occurrence in the past. As in all her actions, in choosing a husband, a girl must obey her parents, and only in this case is she considered "decent" ... In the old days, there were cases of a girl being taken away by force, if her parents did not agree to marry her off. There is no kalym (bride price). As an echo of it there is a custom called "masonry". The groom must expose food and gifts to the bride's relatives, as well as a certain amount of money. After the groom has agreed with the parents, the bride is invited, who in turn must agree. Sometimes her persistent refusal is the cause of matchmaking frustration. Thus, the bride's desire is still considered, although her disobedience to her parents is not approved. We have already cited a story about what kind of work awaits a Mordovian married. In addition, she must take care of the fulfillment of a number of customs, which are absolutely necessary for the family to consider her decent and moral. So widespread was the custom that forbade a married woman to go to visit until she marries her son, or gives her daughter in marriage. This further increased her isolation and isolation from the outside world. In the first year of marriage, the young woman eats standing, alone in the closet. In the end, a number of other prejudices formed certain rules that the Mordovian woman adheres to in family life. She must be a mother first of all. It is considered the worst for a woman if she has no children. In such cases, she always goes to the sorcerers, old women, performs various superstitious rituals, if only through this to become capable of birth x) There is also a lot of care with children. You need to look after, teach, and if you fall ill, then heal. In case of illness, they again turn to healers or treat them with the help of their "native" medicine. What this last one is, is evident from the fact that in some places, for example, such methods of treatment were used: if a child has a stomach ache, then they put him upside down, pressing his stomach with a copper cross, read a conspiracy, etc., accustomed to living according to customs and To the prejudices of antiquity, the Mordovian, due to her ignorance, is the main support of superstition. She is responsible for maintaining the veneration of the ancestors. On days dedicated to the commemoration of the dead, at the Mordovian cemetery, which is often located outside the village, you can see many Mordovians who came here to remember the dead with all kinds of food. Crying and lamentations spread far from the cemetery. Older people are walking around — young people, nevertheless, prefer to have more fun and are more willing, for example, to see off the spring. At the birth of a child, the Mordovian first of all turns to the midwife for help. This was facilitated by the small number of hospitals among the Mordovian population in pre-revolutionary times. The backwardness of the Mordovian woman was also reflected in her great inclination towards religious rituals. The priests enjoyed great respect among the Mordovians and — when it was necessary to comfort them, and in other cases to frighten them — forced them to drag various "offerings" for themselves. Considering this perfectly well at the present time, the clergy develops their work mainly among women (and also young people). Recently, in particular in the Saratov and Ulyanovsk provinces, there has been an increase in the sectarian movement — communities of Baptists and Khlyst, again mainly among women and youth. Mordovka's departure to religion naturally follows from the desire to somehow get rid of the difficult life around her. The old living conditions did not give her any other choice. The way to school was closed to her, she did not participate in public life, what could she do? The question of the fight against religious intoxication is now one of the main ones. She instilled in her children the same ignorance and admiration for customs, taking little care of the filth around them. It should also be mentioned that in pre-revolutionary literature, even in scientific works, the belief was widespread that the Mordovian woman was not particularly moral. This is not true. This immorality does not go beyond words. We tried to give a picture of the life of a Mordovian woman in pre-revolutionary times. Already she can give an idea of ​​what tremendous work is required to turn a completely illiterate, infected with age-old prejudices into a fighter in the public arena, a builder of a new way of life. The work is even more difficult due to the sparseness of the Mordovian population and other conditions. And yet, as we will see now, it is being carried out and already has its own successes.
3. Work among Mordovians during the years of the revolution
Work among Mordovians, one might say, is still in the first stage of its development. Mordovka is just awakening 'and begins to realize the need for this work. It gives different results in different places. In the Penza province, where the national face of the Mordovians is most vivid, the Mordovians are more numerous and much more attention is paid to it, the work gives great results. In other places, it is weaker. But everywhere the awakening of the Mordovian woman is noticeable, her desire to take part in social life as actively as possible. This activity often encounters a number of obstacles, which are not so easy to remove. This is primarily a lack of workers from among the Mordovian population itself, with the backwardness of the Mordovians, their poor knowledge of the Russian language, only a Mordovian woman can work successfully among them. There are very few female workers, even the staff units of the women's departments are not fully filled. In some localities, the work is carried out by Russians through an interpreter. It is especially difficult in such cases in villages with a mixed population. At one meeting, the instructor was told by the Russians that they did not understand Mordovian and would leave the meeting if the report was in Mordovian. The Mordovians, in turn, stated that they did not understand Russian. The report had to be delivered in both languages. Literature in the Mordovian language is also scarce, which greatly complicates the work, since it is not easy to swing the Mordovian even without it. In many cases, the work had to start with walking from door to door and involving individual individuals. The next step was the organization of delegate meetings — the most agitated and prepared ones fell. Widows and poor people were more easily involved in delegate meetings: they still make up the majority of delegate meetings. Only recently has the number of middle peasants started to increase. Inside the delegate meetings, the Mordovian woman seems to go through the school necessary for further social activities — she eliminates her illiteracy and acquires the knowledge she needs through travel, special lectures and courses. Gradually, delegate meetings, involving an increasing number of Mordovian women in their activities, begin to have a significant impact on the social life of the village. This is already a huge achievement. Men are not used to women attending public meetings — their presence is considered unnecessary. With this deeply rooted view, only an organized struggle is possible. Such an organized struggle is being waged by delegate meetings. As a result, a Mordovian woman who has never before attended meetings or meetings not only begins to participate in meetings and elections to councils, but she herself is elected to various institutions. So the Mordovian woman is involved in Soviet construction, 'and this involvement is noticeable in those areas where there are delegate meetings. Pre-election meetings of Mordovians are held separately in their native language. In the Ulyanovsk province, during the re-election, Mordovians were sent invitations in their native language, which immediately noticeably increased attendance. But Mordovians are most willing to respond to practical undertakings. They themselves, often spontaneously begin with this. So they are interested (and precisely Fig. 1. Delegates of the 7th Penza Congress of Workers and Peasant Women on March 8-10, 1927, ING practically) the question of price reduction. By discussing this issue and working in cooperation, the Mordovian woman is currently already actively participating in reducing prices. Great interest is shown in handicraft circles, but there are still few of them - the lack of leaders and, mainly, the lack of funds hinders their wider implantation. It should be noted that when a girl goes to a handicraft, sewing or sewing class, then the parents do not protest, considering this business useful, but if to a meeting, then there is “nothing to do”. In a number of places, on the initiative of the Mordovians themselves, practical initiatives are being carried out. So in B. Berezinskaya parish. Kore. at. Ulyan, a women's artel was organized to sell milk and eggs. This volost is generally distinguished by its desire for cooperation: all delegates are in cooperation. In some districts, public funds are organized either for the protection of mothers and babies or for helping the poor, etc. The situation is somewhat worse with regard to health education. Healers and healers still enjoy sufficient respect. But already in many places the struggle with the "grandmothers" begins. Here, the absence of medical personnel with knowledge of the Mordovian language is of great importance, which greatly complicates the appeal of a Mordovian for medical help. Thus, in one village “they do not understand what the paramedic is saying, so they don’t turn to her and go to the healers”. There are complaints about the rough treatment of midwives. The latter is a legacy of the old times, when, thanks to the policy of ethnic hatred, the Mordovians were not considered people either. Meanwhile, the high incidence among Mordovians (trachoma, etc.) makes the issue of medical care and health education especially important. Work must move towards strengthening medical help and training of health workers from among the Mordovians. It is in this context that the issue was resolved by the XIX Penza Gubernia Conference (1926). The nursery is already partly served by Mordovians who have completed the nursery courses. The number of creches in Mordovian villages is constantly increasing. Practical Mordovians themselves soon realized the necessity and usefulness of a nursery, making it possible to pull children out of a dirty, unsanitary environment. They raise and analyze this issue at volost meetings, at delegate meetings and pass resolutions on the opening of a nursery. Mordovka at the same time helps the nursery with everything she can. There are cases when delegates went with signature lists around the village to gather at the nursery, and the population responded sympathetically to this. Thus, the Mordovian is more willing to participate in practical activities. Sometimes there are complaints from the localities that the organizers do not always take this into account and do not consider the organization of practical work as their business. In many cases, practical work often begins spontaneously, at the initiative of the Mordovians themselves. But for this they lack the funds and leadership. One organizer ', speaking about the work among the Mordovians, remarked: "Now, if there were a sewing machine, then there would be no lights out." This practicality is reflected in the fact that the Mordovian woman is more likely to go to work in cooperative institutions, she organizes small cooperatives (gardening, fishing, etc.) and, in particular, longs for circles of needlework, sewing and sewing. Demands for them are distributed from all over the Mordovian regions. Through practical measures it is easier to involve the Mordovian woman in social work and in the party. In the party, however, it still amounts to a very insignificant amount — literally one. This is explained by her complete isolation from public life in pre-revolutionary times, her underdevelopment, which prevents her from often carrying out active work. The number of girls in the Komsomol organizations is also very small. On average, they range from 3.8% (Siberia) to 8% (Penza. Gubernia) - the composition of the Mordovian Komsomol. Yes, and those who already work in the party or in the Komsomol, the political level is low, and the active Mordovians - the parties and the Komsomol - are very small. The small number of girls in the Komsomol is partly explained by the fact that parents do not like it when girls go to meetings. Here again [the most acceptable way is through the organization of circles for practical purposes that do not cause negative attitudes. In addition, the small number of literate, developed girls plays a negative role. Mordovka's education is in a deplorable state. Girls make up a very small percentage in primary schools. Their number in secondary and higher educational institutions is even smaller. We have already indicated that the reason for this is the entire past life of the Mordovian, which did not leave time for learning. The disdainful attitude towards the girls 'studies has remained even now, although the overall growth of the pupils' faces is significant, and their craving; k (there is no doubt about education. Often girls are not allowed to go to school because they study together, and parents consider it shameful, they fear that the girl will deteriorate. hooligans. ”Even this reasoning is a significant concession, because previously they considered teaching unnecessary, now they recognize its benefits, BUT they are only afraid that the girl will“ spoil ”with joint education. The same can be said about involving girls in the pioneer movement. One must think that in the near future this will also be eliminated. In any case, with only 3.6 v / v literate muzzles, and the slow increase in girls' pupils, which is observed now, is a tremendous achievement. One cannot expect that the accumulated ignorance for centuries and prejudices so immediately and will be destroyed. Little by little, the Mordovian woman begins to penetrate into the secondary school, (mainly, pedagogical schools) universities and so-called party schools. The main obstacle on this path is there is also poor preparation. Therefore, at a number of educational institutions, special preparatory departments are being opened for Mordovians. Work to eliminate illiteracy among Mordovians is carried out through educational centers, reading rooms, red corners and other political and educational institutions. After the October Revolution, a strong craving for learning awakens in Mordovka, and as early as 1922, women in some villages passed resolutions on organizing literacy schools. However, to accomplish this, it was necessary first of all to prepare a sufficient number of workers from among the Mordovians themselves. Annually, for this purpose, dozens of Mordovian girls are sent to pedagogical schools and other educational institutions, so that upon graduation they can work in the mass of the Mordovian population. The growth of political and educational work is characterized by the growth of grassroots political institutions in the Mordovian countryside. From 1926 to 1927 in five provinces (Nizhegorodsk., Ulyanovsk., Penzensk., Samarsk. And Saratovsk.) This growth was from 40 to 60%. Courses are being held for huts and illiteracy liquidators, which are gradually increasing there are cultural forces of the Mordovian village. Four newspapers are published in the Mordovian language, designed for the masses, and so on. Mordovka learns to go to the reading room, where she often has a special day. On this day, conversations are held on issues of interest to her, often judges and doctors make reports - and a woman learns to protect her health, defend her rights, etc. Newspapers and magazines are read collectively, after which they discuss emerging issues. Work is underway with women and at gatherings. In some places, they begin to publish their wall newspapers, raising and discussing my painful questions in them. It is interesting to point out those issues that interest the Mordovian woman and are discussed at women's meetings. In one volost, for example, the following questions were posed: 1) Where did the tax go under the old regime? 2) How do women live in capitalist countries? 3) On the measures taken by the Soviet government to eliminate the shortage of goods, etc. These questions show the breadth of the needs and interests of Mordovian women. Mordovka also penetrates the trade unions, we see her in club work, she herself often, as indicated, spontaneously organizes various circles, in addition to those that exist on the initiative of the women's department. Even in distant Siberia, the Mordovian woman does not lag behind her Volga tribesman, and there she gradually takes the path of social work, we see her in councils, at meetings, etc. If we want to sum up the work among Mordovians, then we must admit that work this, which began 2-3 years ago, has so far gone through its first stage — it was not yet planned, in many cases it grew spontaneously and only now is entering the path of continuity, planning and depth. Its shortcomings naturally follow from what has been said: a shortage of workers, an interruption in work, not always sufficient attention from the party and Soviet lower cells, etc. These shortcomings are deepened by the scattered population of the Mordovia. Thanks to this, it is difficult to take into account the work done so far in its entirety — what has been said here is, of course, very incomplete and only gives a certain idea of ​​the whole work. At the same time, the achievements of the work are very significant. First of all, the fact that with all the scatteredness of the Mordovians is of great positive importance, there is no longer a corner where the Mordovian woman has not yet awakened. She, who had never participated in public life before, is now in many cases an active social activist. She who did not know the doctrine before, she now strives for it and learns. Having never picked up newspapers, she now writes them herself. She puts on plays in the Mordovian language, begins a fight against midwives and "grandmothers," organizes artels, circles, helps her poor neighbor with united social efforts, etc., etc. It goes without saying that the party and Komsomol organizations are the main conductors of this work. From 1 / VI to 20 / USh 1927 in Moscow, at the initiative of the Department. Workers and Peasant Women of the Central Committee of the CPSU (b) held courses for workers among women nationals. There were 35 Mordovians on these courses. The courses not only provided the Mordovian village with a number of comrades fully prepared for work among Mordovians, but for the first time they summed up the work done so far among Mordovians throughout the USSR, since these courses were attended by Mordovians - representatives from all sides of our Union. The disadvantages and merits of the job were equally accounted for here, so that experience aided in deployment. further work, which entered a more profound and wider stage.

4. Digital materials on work among Mordovians.
Delegate meetings in 1925-26 covered 1804 Mordovians. To date, this number has increased. So on the Penza lips. in 1925-26 there were 730 delegates, in 1927 there were 972 cases. mordovoks. An idea of ​​the social composition is given by information to Penz. lips. (in 1927) - farm laborers - 0.8% (and in general v / v laborers in the province 2.3 v / v), middle peasants 26% (and in total 35% in the province) And most of the poor. In some counties, delegates' meetings are still almost entirely composed of poor people. Girls - 20%. There are more widows than married ones. All peasant women. A number of conferences and meetings on work among women have been held (Nizhny Novgorod, Penza Gubernia, etc.). During the day of March 8, in some places, delegates staged performances in the Mordovian language, etc. The number of ox organizers is insignificant in Penza. and Samara lips. in total — 11 (paid) .2. In 1927, in the Mordovian villages there were 415 cells with 3105 party members. We do not have exact figures on the number of women, but in any case this number is very insignificant. So on the Ulyanovsk lips. on 1 / U11-26 there were only 8 Mordovians in the party (for 193,000 of the population of Mordovians), in 1926 in the Penza province. accepted 4 Mordovians in the party, etc. Girls in the Komsomol make up from 3.8% (Siberia) to 8% (Nizhegor. Gubernia) of Pioneers in 4 provinces for 1/1-1927 - 2695. The percentage of participation in re-election of councils is from 10-15% to 60% of all women. During the last re-elections in Penza. lips. 260 pre-election meetings were held among Mordovians. By Penz. lips. last re-election. The number of Mordovians elected to the councils increased from 258 to 338. In total, the number of women members of village councils in the Mordovians and villages of the Penza province. is 7% 'in VIK'ah - 13%. In Ardatovsk. at. Ulyan, G. took part in the last re-elections of 2016 Mordovians (6.5% of all Mordovians who have the right to choose) 1). 13 women were elected to the village councils. (1.1%), to the executive committees - 6 (10.4%) and 1 to the PEC members. To Bu-guruslan. county participation in the re-elections in 1926 - 15.6%, 1927 - 21%; in Samara u. 1926 - 20%, 1927 - 24.4%, etc. Women take part in the work of other Soviet institutions, and Nakzh ^ in cooperation.3 "Literacy of the Mordovians — Penza province — men — 22.2 %, women - 3.6%; Ulyanovsk province - men 24.9%; women - 3.1%; Samara city — men — 21.4%, women —6.9. In five provinces (Ulyanovsk, Nizhegor., Penz., Samar., Sarat.) In the Mordovian villages there were) schools of the 1st stage — 1926 — 636, seven-year-olds — 7, nine-year-olds — 2, peasant youth schools — 4, pedagogical schools — 4 and Mordovian branches at the Nizhny Novgorod and Samara workers' faculties. In 1925/26, 136 Mordovians were sent to universities, but only 67 were admitted (due to poor training). Izb-reading room - 130, red corners - 620, liq-points - 488. During the year, courses for huts were held (4) - 120 people were graduated and 135 liquidators of illiteracy graduated at various courses. In 1925-26 it passed through the health centers, Nizhegor. lips. 1457 people Mordovians, of whom 672 are women. The percentage of girls in schools is no more than 25-30%. The following figures partly characterize the state of education of Mordovians. In Buguruslansky district in 1923-1924 from among all those who entered schools 1 st. there were 12о / 0 (girls, in 1924-1925-17%, 1926-1927-20%. In the Malotolkayskaya seven-year school, there were 44 girls out of 115 students, and in the pedagogical college 66 out of 127. (1926-27). volosts are successfully involving Mordovians in voluntary societies, out of 472 members of the Island "Down with illiteracy" - 111 Mordovians. 4. The degree of provision of the Mordovian population with medical care: in Penza province. in Mordovian villages - 3 hospitals (8.2% of the total number of hospitals , while the Mordovian population in the Penza province totals 18%.) To increase medical assistance to the Mordovian population, special detachments are practiced to combat trachoma and venereal diseases. Health education is underway - its size is still small. In Mordovian regions there are orphanages, playgrounds - but their number has not been taken into account. Recently, the number of nurseries in Mordovian villages has been increasing, thanks to the help of the population. There is no digital material for a number of branches of work among women, but there is no doubt that this work is being done (protection TV, participation in the work of judicial institutions, etc. The figures given here are very incomplete and sketchy, since the work among Mordovians has not yet been summarized in digital materials. These figures only give a partial idea of ​​the work among the Mordovians. More materials on Penza Gubernia, which in general can be considered advanced in work among the Mordovians. For the present, the numbers of achievements should naturally be slightly increased. When writing this brochure, in addition to a number of works and materials related to the general history and ethnography of the Mordovians and the author's personal observations were used , who himself was a Russified Mordvin, spent a number of years in a Mordovian village - the following sources: 1. Polumordvinov (ed.) Mordovsk. pop. Penz. lips. 1927.2.Shakhmatov.-Mordov. ethnography, collection. 3. Materials (reports, summaries, etc.). Department of Workers and Peasant Women and the Department of Nationalities of the Central Committee of the CPSU (b) .4. A number of information received from the organizer on (work among women - the Department of Workers and Peasants of the Ardatovsky Ukom of the CPSU (b) (Ulyan, g.) T-Naumova and others ...

CONTENTS Page From the publisher ................ • ............. 31. General outline of the Mordovians ............... ............. 52. The life of the Mordovians before the revolution .............. 183. Work among the Mordovians during the years of the revolution .... 254. Digital materials on work among Mordovians. .35