1. Country and population
On the northern slopes of the Caucasian ridge and on. The plain adjacent to it is home to many different nationalities, most of which are usually attached to one group of "Caucasian peoples", although they speak languages ​​completely: one unlike the other. In the former Russian Empire, all this diverse population of the North Caucasus was ruled by Russian governors, regional chiefs and Russian officials subordinate to them, and the interests of these "small nationalities", the indigenous population of the region, were almost completely ignored. The dispossessed, dark highlanders responded to the Russian government for such "care" of them with robberies, robberies, and sometimes open attacks on the Russian authorities. The North Caucasus was one of the main fronts of the civil war, since it was this region that the white armies made their base. Now, after the blood and fire of these years, the North Caucasus has finally got the opportunity to build its life on the basis of a healthy national demarcation. Several national regions emerged from the former Terek region, between them the Chechen Autonomous Region, which occupies an area of ​​88,875 sq. versts and stretches from east to west along the mountains, 100 versts, and from north to south, across the Caucasian plain into the depths of the mountains, 140-150 versts. In the south, the Chechen Autonomous Oblast borders on the Georgian SSR, from which it is separated by the snow ridge of the Main Caucasus; in the north, the main border is the Terek River, which separates Chechnya from the steppes of the present Terek Oblast of the Northern Caucasus Territory; in the east, Chechnya borders on the Dagestan Autonomous Republic, in the west, on the Ingush Autonomous Region. This whole family of multi-tribal national republics and regions of the North Caucasus d) occupies, in general, two geographic regions: the foothill plain and the northern slope of the Caucasus Mountains. The foothill plain is primarily a steppe with fertile black earth soil. In the region of Chechnya, this steppe is intersected by several chains of hills, which gives it an undulating character, while near the mountains the area becomes intersected by gullies; in the foothills, the gullies become deeper, passing into narrow and formidable mountain gorges, overgrown, for the most part, with dense forests. Stormy streams rush along the bottom of these gorges, escaping from the snowy peaks of the Caucasus; These streams, breaking out onto the plain, form a whole network of numerous rivers and rivers irrigating the Ciscaucasian steppe.For Chechnya and its closest neighbors, the Terek is the main river, which, leaving the city of Vladikavkaz from the mountain gorges to the plain, flows through it with a powerful stream And takes all the rivers and rivers cutting through the Chechen one ') To them we must also add: Karachaevskaya, Cherkesskaya, Adygeiskaya, North Ossetian, Kabardino-Balkarian Ae-ton. region and Sunzhensky Autonomous Okrug. territory. How many, these mountain rivers have one feature that is very harmful to the surrounding population; they are characterized by sudden, very violent and dangerous floods; strong water rises periodically 3 times a year — in spring, in the midst of summer heat and in autumn; a sudden and violent flood may occur after each downpour swept through the mountains. The surrounding population has to constantly struggle with the destructive power of these floods. Within Chechnya, the foothill steppe is irrigated very unevenly: a very large area of ​​the Alkhanchurt Valley, a long strip stretching from west to east between two chains of hills, is completely devoid of flowing water and at the same time suffers greatly from droughts; on the contrary, the areas near the mountains are also rich in flowing waters, and there is enough rain in the summer. The mountains rise in ledges above the Ciscaucasian steppe: the first ridge is wooded, on the second, higher ridge, forests turn into mountain meadows, why is this second row of mountains is called "Pasture"; behind it rises the “Rocky” ridge, in some places even covered with snow in summer, and, finally, behind it, covered with eternal snow, rise the ridges of the Central Caucasus. These rows of ridges are cut by deep gorges of mountain streams, along which the auls of Mountainous Chechnya are usually located. Thus, the Caucasus Mountains form rows of parallel chains within Chechnya, moreover, in some places these chains are also connected by transverse ridges; as a result, Mountainous Chechnya is one of the most inaccessible areas in the Caucasus; there are few roads in it, and even those that do exist form continuous and sometimes very steep ascents and descents; overcome one ridge, and behind it rises a second, even steeper and higher; after the second, the third, the fourth ...Roads wind over the terrible steepness, all the time they are punched in the form of cornices in the rocks, over the abysses, at the bottom of which mighty streams roar and gurgle menacingly. Very often it is necessary to cross these streams ford, which is far from safe, and when they swell after showers, they completely cut off the message. Dense forests cover the gorges and slopes of the mountains of Chechnya, in which a mass of various animals live: bears, wolves, foxes, deer, and high in the mountains, various breeds of wild goats and chamois. Harsh, wild and beautiful Mountain Chechnya. The climate of the Ciscaucasian plain is very healthy and favorable for agriculture: winters here are very mild, severe frosts are rare, on clear days the sun warms up decently; spring comes very early — violets often bloom in March; the summer is very hot and sunny, and the beautiful "golden" autumn lasts until December. In the mountains, the climate, of course, is much colder, winters are longer and harsher, summers are cooler and rainy. The number of the Chechen people is now about 310,000, or 98.3%! the entire population of the Region. We do not know when and how the Chechens appeared on the northern slopes of the Caucasian Range; their legends tell about this, but the reliability of such oral stories, of course, is very small. First of all, "Chechens" is a Russian name; "Chechen" was called (and is still called) a large aul in the Foothill zone, and the Russian newcomers christened all the people by his name. The Chechens themselves call themselves knakhchio ", which means" people "in their language; this name mainly referred to the Chechens who lived on the plain. Mountain Chechens were called "lamora", that is, "Mountain dwellers". According to all data, in former times Chechens lived almost exclusively in the mountains and only relatively recently, about 150 years ago, began to be resettled on the plane. Isolated in their mountain strongholds, the Chechens have preserved the ancient order of their life to this day; until very recently they had no tribal Organization; not only every aul, but even every house inhabited by close relatives, was an independent whole and could, for example, fight with another house; there was no organized tribal power. The only organization was a sprawling family, a clan that consisted of many separate families, each living in its own sakla, but aware of their common blood ties along the male line; every Chechen is firm! knew and knows many tens (sometimes even hundreds) of his close and distant relatives. Each such vast circle of relatives, a clan, is called "teipa" in Chechen; teip is subdivided into smaller divisions: "tara", "tary" into "neki", "neki" into "cini"; there are more than a hundred of all "teips". In every family, the eldest man (husband, father, grandfather, great-grandfather of the husband) exercises power. To resolve issues concerning (in a certain family, especially if the inhabitants of some aul belong to the same family, a council of old people, representatives of the older generation of this family in the male line, is gathering. Finally, Chechens had meetings of old people representing the older generation of all Chechen families; they ( occasionally took place in 3-4 points, of which the meeting on a mound near the mountain village of Tsentoroy enjoyed particular fame.But all these meetings cannot, strictly speaking, be called an authoritarian organization, since neither the decisions of the meeting of aul old people, assemblies were not binding, they were nothing more than intermediary assemblies, at which "adats" were gradually developed - the common law of the Chechens; these assemblies did not have any signs of state power. and property, since in the case of a murder, the entire rd of the murdered, mainly the nearest relatives, took revenge on the murderer and his family; the relatives of the murdered man killed the murderer. Usually, after this retaliatory murder, negotiations for reconciliation began, which often reached a safe end. But it also happened that a new murder provoked revenge on the part of the family of the first murderer, etc .;both families found themselves in a position of war with each other and mutual murders from blood revenge could continue for decades. This martial law between the two clans ended only with the consent of the offended clan to reconciliation, and the offending clan had to pay a large sum as a ransom for blood; the unit of account was usually a cow. But it was extremely difficult to achieve such consent to reconciliation on the part of the offended, and the reconciled “blood feuds” (ie those in a relationship of blood revenge or “mustugulla” in Chechen) became closer to each other than even their brothers. Thus, murder or an equal insult to the clan threatened (and still threatens) with extremely serious consequences, and the “mustugulla” custom is more formidable and restraining than even our highest measure of social protection. Blood revenge only applies to men; killing a woman is the greatest shame for a Chechen. Thus, the position of each Chechen is determined by the position and size of the clan to which He belongs. The more numerous and richer the genus, the higher the position of each of its members. The position outside the clan is equal to our "outlaw", everyone can kill such a Chechen and not be subjected to any further persecution. The Chechens did not have any class barriers, the whole people was a militant freeman of cattle breeders and, in part, farmers. - "We are all bridles (noblemen)" was a Chechen (proverb. They did not have slaves either. This democratic; feature of their social system Chechens This kind of democracy was in connection with the general anarchic features of their social life, which was based not so much on labor economic activity as on the possibility of obtaining material wealth with weapons. The highest praise of a person among the Chechens was "he is a good warrior." ("They are wild konakhi wu"); "bridle-free as a wolf" ("greyhound-senia"), Any formalized power, any subordination to anyone outside their kind, they hated with all their being: “Our light, who else us in the world "(" duna 'vine, deci! ") was their favorite exclamation at feasts. But the growing numbers forced the Chechens to strive for more fertile places than the harsh mountains, and by the beginning of 19 in. they owned the foothill plain along the banks of the Terek. By the same time, the Russian government decided to include the Caucasus in the Russian Empire and the banks of the Terek began to be covered with Russian fortresses and Cossack settlements. A half-century war of huge Russia began with small mountain peoples, the vanguard of which were the Chechens. This war, by the way; depicted by L. Tolstoy in several stories, especially in his story "Cossacks". By the end of the 50s of the last century, Russian troops wiped out many Chechen auls on the plane and partly in the mountains, while in others they billeted the troops after the Chechens and other highlanders had declared themselves defeated. The population of the devastated auls was relocated to a plane, where all the best lands were already given to the new, Cossack villages. It is easy to imagine what a terrible situation the sons of the mountains, free as the wind, have recently found themselves in. Even the generals Nicholas I were embarrassed; they admitted that the new allotments provided to the Chechens evicted from their homes were very insufficient; they wrote that, faced with the threat of extinction, the Chechens would rise again, since under the current conditions it was impossible for them to live !. And when one of the generals, himself Ossetian by origin, Kundukhov, proposed to conduct agitation among the Chechens for their eviction to Turkey, the other authorities gladly seized on this idea. Kundukhov's agitation was successful and over 22,000 Chechens moved through the Transcaucasia to Turkey. But this case was organized in such a way that after 5-6 years from the total number [More than half of the immigrants died, about 10,000 people survived. Needless to say, this "measure" did not improve the situation of the rest of the Chechen people; it found itself partly again locked in the harsh mountain gorges, partly on a plane, beggarly endowed with the worst lands and surrounded by a solid mass of the dominant Cossack population. Until so recently, Chechens, who did not recognize any power over themselves, had to submit to the Russian administration, which at every step grossly insulted their age-old way of life. The economic situation in which the Russian government had placed the Chechens was truly dire; Here is a typical Chechen fairy tale, vividly reflecting their hopeless need: one day a highlander went to work on his piece of land, hoping to stock up on bread by autumn; worked, worked, finally got tired, spread the cloak, lay down and fell asleep; wakes up — the area he has treated has disappeared; the Chechen jumped up, started running around, looking for the disappeared arable land, but in vain; she seemed to have sunk into the water; The discouraged Chechen sadly went home, picked up a cloak from the ground and ... oh, joy, his arable land was under it. The decades following the conquest of the Chechens, right up to the beginning of the World War, showed that there was very little exaggeration in this tale. The question of the economic situation of the highlanders of the North Caucasus remained a difficult question all this time; the works of many public figures have revealed that in mountainous Chechnya, with the then distribution of land, only 10% of the available population could live; for 90% of Chechens there was no place on earth. On the plane, up to 77% of Chechens had a "hungry" allotment. The deputy from the Terek region AP Maslov said in the State Duma on July 5, 1906: “You cannot imagine how insignificant the land holdings of, for example, Chechens are: x / 10, 1/5, a quarter, a third of a tithe. If you ask how much land he has, he will tell you that there is as much land as fits under his cloak. Land is expensive there. So, for example, a piece of land under a cow costs as much as the cow itself. This situation makes one involuntarily think about how they exist. " Such a speech could only have been dictated by the truly catastrophic state of affairs in the Nagornyi zone of the Northern Caucasus and in Chechnya, in particular. The tsarist government did nothing to alleviate this glaring need; on the contrary, his servants, pacifying the "robbers" of the Chechens, Ingush and others, burned and demolished entire auls, forbade the Chechens to move freely, in a word completed the business of the economic destruction of this little people. For the Chechens, there was only one economic way out of the land need: renting land on the plane from the Cossacks, German colonists, etc., from those who were given the lands taken from the Chechens. For all their ruin, the Chechens were forced to pay up to 400,000 rubles. land 'lease; per man's soul there were annually up to 8 rubles. rental expense. These figures show that the legal exit from want was largely ineffective. It is understandable, therefore, that Chechens often resorted to a way out that was not envisaged by Russian officials — robbery, theft, and robbery. This way out was much more natural for the militant Chechens, since the Russian enslavers did not evoke any feelings for themselves, except for the most acute and irreconcilable hatred. And in the North Caucasus in general, in Chechnya in particular, a number of famous robbers appeared who were real fighters against the autocratic Russian administration, robbers, who sometimes made even representatives of the military government tremble. IN! In the last decade before the World War, the Chechen abrek 'Zelimkhan, who for many years terrorized the North Caucasian administration and deliberately defended the national rights of his oppressed fellow tribesmen, gained all-Russian fame in Russia. The tsarist military and civilian authorities behaved in Chechnya as in a theater! military actions: demanded that the peaceful Chechen population capture and extradite Zelimkhan and, in support of their demands, arrested numerous relatives of the abrek; sent punitive expeditions of all kinds of weapons, which burned entire villages, leaving the unfortunate population in the open. In conclusion, the Chechens were forbidden to settle and lease land on the plane. In parallel with this policy of direct physical strangulation, the tsarist government tried, since the 60s, to artificially create a class of Chechens - large landowners, which would be submissive and loyal to the king, and with help which would be easier to cope with the whole rebellious tribe; but this attempt did not yield serious results. However, as a result of a long and close contact of the natural Chechen economy with capitalist | the world of Russia, in the Chechen masses there was a certain economic stratification; an insignificant stratum of strong, "kulak" farms emerged, which had significant herds of sheep, or rented relatively large land areas on the plane; these families resorted to the hired labor of farm laborers, who appeared as a result of the same economic differentiation. A layer of small merchants who traded in Chechen wool and Russian chintz also developed; but this stratum had no serious social significance, just like the very poorly developed craft; handicrafts almost never existed in Chechnya. In recent decades, a very small Chechen bourgeoisie has emerged, formed mainly on the basis of the Grozny oil industry; but its isolated representatives of necessity were cut off from the rest of the popular masses, more likely to supplement the cadres of the Russian bourgeoisie. The Chechen intelligentsia, also very small in number, who had gone through Russian schools and universities, often took the disasters of their people to heart and during the years of the revolution and civil war, to a large extent stood on the side of the Soviet regime. In general, the emerging social stratification of the Chechen people did not cause any significant social struggle, it gave way to a sense of national cohesion in the face of the violent tsarist administration and in front of the unity of the hostile mood of the Chechens in relation to the Cossack population. The cultural level of the Chechen people is extremely low; suffice it to say that he did not have his own written language to this day. Before the revolution, there were no Russian public schools in Chechnya either, so the Chechen mass was almost 100% illiterate. There was not a single hospital, and in general there was almost no medical assistance. This is how the small freedom-loving Caucasian people gasped under the heavy foot of the Russian enslavers; immersed in a deep darkness of ignorance, he did not find any other way to fight for his liberation, except for direct revenge on his enemies in the form of robbery and murder.
2. Life of Chechens and the position of women before the revolution
The economy and life of the Chechens are somewhat different in two different regions they occupy: in the mountains and on the plane Mountain auls are located along the gorges of the upper reaches of rivers and rivers flowing into the Terek, the centers of which are Sharo-Argun and Shato-Argun, merging together and forming a high-water tributary. Terek-Argun. There are more Chechen villages in this high and rugged mountainous terrain! some of them are located at the confluence of mountain streams, where the gorges expand somewhat and form relatively convenient spaces for construction. Sakli are most often made up of slate stones, almost not fastened with clay, and the back wall rests against the rock; inside the mountain saklya consists of 1–2 semi-dark rooms, with a rammed earth roll, in the middle of which there is a hearth; women try to maintain the fire on the hearth continuously, just as it was supposed to be done in the most ancient times. Above the hearth on a thick iron chain hangs a cauldron in which food is cooked. The hearth and the chain are like the sacred focus of the whole house: the kidnapping of the chain is almost the same as for the murder. Other furnishings of the sakli are extremely poor: a low three-legged table, very low three-legged benches, a faience teapot with cups, earthenware, a few! the peculiar shape of copper vessels, bedding heaped up — that's all; the richer have a separate guest room, "kunatskaya", where only men gather; there the floor is covered with mats or carpets, and sometimes a fireplace is set up. Usually it is cold and dirty in the mountain sakla! and dark. Adjacent to the sakle is a wicker-fenced courtyard, a characteristic feature of which are "sapets" - huge round wicker baskets for storing corn; near the sakli itself, a covered room is set up, where livestock is kept in winter, the main property of the Chechen mountaineer; this cattle is mainly sheep - "baranta", and several cows. But this cattle-breeding economy does not provide a mountaineer even from hunger; average number of his herds | in 50-60 heads gave in the last years before the world war 25-30 rubles. income. It is clear, therefore, that sheep breeding in; mountains quickly fell and the Chechens sought to expand their agriculture, for which they, like air, needed land on the plane. And now Chechen sheep breeding, especially in the mountains, is in a state of decline; one of the serious reasons for this is the terrible death of livestock in 1918 We have already seen how the government of the old regime treated this aspiration of the Chechens. In the mountains, there is very little land suitable for plowing; a more or less suitable site must first be cleared of debris of rocks and stones, folding them along the edges of the selected site in the form of a fence; Then this fence must be turned into a real stone fence, which would protect the future field from talus, from stormy rain streams, and Often the need forced the Chechen women to drag fertile land to a fenced area from somewhere from the bottom of the valley, and very often this land had to be dragged on yourself. When, as a result of these hard labor, the field was ready for sowing, it was slightly plowed with a primitive plow and sown almost exclusively with corn. It is understandable, therefore, that in the mountains an arable plot of 1D - h / tithe cost up to 700 rubles before the war. It is also clear that such conditions did not allow Chechens to get out of those forms of social life backward for millennia that have survived with them, thanks to their isolated life in inaccessible mountains. Above, we have already got acquainted with the tribal structure of the Chechens, with the "Mustugulla" disposition that determines their social relations, the right of bloody revenge. Now let's see how their life developed before the revolution, what place a Chechen woman occupied in this life. Chechens, like all almost the peoples of the East, religion is one of the most important components of everyday life; Chechens, like most of the Caucasian highlanders, are Muslims. But they became Muslims relatively recently — 200 years ago; therefore this religion has not penetrated so deeply, so to speak, into the flesh and blood of their life, As is the case with most other Muslim peoples. And the very living conditions of the Chechens in the barren mountains, without a sufficient economic base, made them unsuitable for any state order. Meanwhile, the Muslim religion, which arose about 1300 years ago among the nomad Arabs, reflected in itself the transition of this people to settled life and to the establishment of state order. The Koran — the Muslim Gospel — is not only a liturgical book, but at the same time, as it were, a code of laws; several ancient Muslim legalists adapted the sayings of the Qur'an to guide everyday relationships; these their interpretations of the holy Muslim book made up several additional books, on the basis of which all Muslim states are governed. Thus, Islam is not only a religion, but also obliges to a certain state order, which is most often denoted by the word "Sharia". Sharia establishes an organization of supreme authority to which all Muslims must obey; he also establishes a judicial organization ', so that all clashes between individuals and between groups of people must be resolved in special courts. The old freemen of the Chechens, of course,' could not fully obey the Sharia and alongside the Muslim law they adopted, their ancient custom continued to live and operate , the so-called "adat". Let us now see what place in life the Sharia gives to a woman, then it will be easier for us to understand what the position of a Chechen woman was before the revolution. According to Sharia, a woman, one might say, is completely excluded from public life; no man's eye should see her, except, of course, her husband and next of kin; therefore, outside the home, she can only appear wrapped in a veil, a “veil,” which completely hides her face and figure; with a silent shadow, she should slide along the street, stop when meeting a man, making way for him. Accordingly, the whole life of a woman remains, as it were, eternally underage; having property rights, she should not independently participate in any transactions; a man, a relative, speaks on her behalf. Likewise, a woman has no voice in the most important moment of her life — when deciding whether to marry. A Sharia marriage is simply a bargain in which the girl's father, or, in his absence, the closest senior male relative, sells it to the groom under certain conditions in the presence of the mullah and witnesses. The exact purchase price is called "kalym", in Chechen "Urdu"; the bride, for her part, brings to the house of her future husband, too, precisely defined property, the so-called "kebin-haqq", this property she owns and in case of divorce, takes it with her. According to Sharia law, you can have no more than 4 wives at a time, but you can change wives as much as you like. Every husband can breed himself; for this, he only needs to pronounce a precisely established phrase, which consists, approximately, of the words: "I let you go." After this, the wife must return to her home, taking away her dowry, and the husband; is obliged to maintain it for 2 - 3 months. But a wife cannot demand a divorce from her husband, except in a few strictly defined cases. Thus, a woman, according to Sharia, is completely slave to a man; it is simply seen as a thing; she is a man's instrument of pleasure, she is the producer of his children, she is a labor force: in the household. As you can see, Muslim laws were written by men and only for men. As already mentioned, before the revolution, Chechnya was just a few districts of the Terek region. and was run by Russian government officials; but in the mountains life went on in its own special way, and Russian officials in this internal one! Chechen life was interfered with only sporadically, mainly in the form of punitive expeditions; so that even before the revolution the Chechens lived according to their own laws, and not according to the Russians; we have already seen how one lived in this, let us now see how the life of a Chechen woman developed under the rule of sharia and adat. Starting from the cradle, the Chechen woman felt her powerlessness, since the birth of a girl, and not a boy, was usually met with displeasure; a boy is a future man and fighter, a successor of the family; and with the girl in the future, only fuss and the possibility of any collisions in connection with her marriage. So if a baby boy was surrounded by the attention available in conditions of mass Chechen poverty, then girls in the first years of life grew up completely homeless; Figures show us that the mortality rate of girls significantly exceeded the mortality rate of boys: with an approximately equal percentage of births of boys and girls, by the end of the first year of life there were only 87.8 girls per 100 boys. As soon as a girl grew up to 6-7 years old, she + a participant in the hard economic labor of his mother, while the boy enjoyed the unrestrained freedom of children; and this also strongly influenced the mortality of adolescent girls: the male population at the age of 4-19 is almost 11% higher than the female of the same age, while at a more mature age we see the opposite relationship, the numerical predominance of women. But now the girl is 12-13 years old and she is already becoming an adult; now she is directly affected by the deep humiliation in which the Muslim law and the ancient Chechen custom put a Chechen woman. True, the Chechen woman never wore a Muslim “veil”, and the girls walked with open faces, covering only their hair and part of their forehead with a black “chukhta”; but no man could touch her even with the tip of a finger; the girl did not dare to approach the man and still, of course, talk to him. The Chechen "adat" considered every touch! to a woman, as an attempt to rape and, therefore, insult the entire family, the entire "teip", for which the offended relatives had to take revenge; this custom is much more powerful than the veil; the woman is isolated from the male world, which owns life, her as a minor is protected by a harsh custom. Entangled by this custom, like a chador, the girl led her hard working life: she worked in the field, looked after the cattle, carried water from afar, and did continuous housework. In winter, in the slush, snow and frost, she ran without a warm outer dress, which she should not have for the same adat. > And, as we have seen, not everyone could endure this harsh life, many died before reaching the most blossoming, according to our concepts, the time of youth. There were, of course, fleeting joys: in the summer, when the sun went down, girls gathered in a light crowd at the spring, and at some distance male youth crowded; glances swift as lightning crossed, shy girlish ones ran through: smiles — here highland "romances" were struck, which did not always end happily; in any case, the choice of wives often took place at the spring. Other meeting places for young people were parties, arranged in winter, when the girls were somewhat relieved of their hard work; in someone's more or less cramped "kunatsk" on one side of the room, a cramped and colorful group sat in festively dressed girls, and on the other, a gray formation of male "Circassians"; a teenage girl plays the harmonica, to the sounds of which there is "courtship", that is, exchange of very expressive views, which had its own special designation in the Chechen language: "dog da-khar", that is, "Opening the heart"; and only, of course. Occasionally it also happened that some guy, who had planned a betrothed for himself, would lie in wait for her somewhere in a deserted place and exchanged two or three phrases with her; Of course, it was not very safe, but for some reason the guy was convinced of the girl's attitude towards him. Chechen girls had their own ideal of a man, which coincided in general with male ideas about this subject. We know that there have been cases when Chechen girls dared to resist the groom's harassment, which did not satisfy this ideal. Here is a Chechen song that the girls sing: My dear rode, Now the beloved rode, Long awaited, Long unseen, I will kiss the lips of the dear, I would kiss them if they were bloody like a wolf. Another song describes the raid on the Cossack a village led by a young Chechen brave: Look, friends, look: My brave fellow is wounded, Blood is flowing down his hand ... Joy is happiness ... I will take care of my brave fellow, I will bandage his wound with a silk sleeve The following song is unusually expressive. I do not need, mother, the One who sells Oil, firewood. I am not talking, mother, about a smart, tight-fitting, rich fellow. I say, mother, I love In rags dressed, Disheveled, as a wolf whose hair has peeled off. I TELL ABOUT the one who has a damask complexion, who has a wolf's heart. the same belligerent mood that possessed and owns mu the female half of the Chechen people, and which found expression in Chechen folk poetry. All these meetings prepared the most important events in the life of a Chechen woman of the past — getting married; but the person most interested in this event — the girl — was completely devilish and powerless. A Chechen could get himself a wife in 2 ways: 1) he sent matchmakers to the girl's parents, who agreed on all the details of the marriage as a trade deal: on the gifts of the groom to the bride and her family, which gifts were mandatory and required serious expenses from the groom; on the size of the ransom money - "Urdu", which was not actually paid by the groom, but was stipulated as some security for the wife in case of divorce; about the property that the girl will bring to the house of her future husband, etc. If the negotiating parties came to an agreement, the groom had to collect money for multiple exchange of gifts, as well as for arranging a wedding feast. Money was required for this, so much that often peasant farms were ruined as a result of the marriage of their sons. The marriage ceremony does not exist as a religious ceremony according to Sharia; accordingly, with the Chechens, the mullah, or, more often, some of his deputy, in the presence of the groom and close relatives of both parties, asked the bride if she wanted to get married, and pronounced a brief formula of the contract; that was the whole act of marriage. After performing a number of wedding ceremonies, the girl passed into the quality of a wife in the property of her husband, under whose authority her further life proceeded. It could also happen that "the groom had to collect the funds necessary for the marriage for a long time, and all this time the girl was considered to be his; according to Chechen customs, only the groom could refuse the bride, but in no way the other way around; and in this small detail (We feel all the power of a man, all the subordination of a woman. This is the first way for a Chechen woman to marry, the way established by the teachings of Sharia, according to which the bride is only a powerless subject of a trade deal. Another way of getting married is based on ancient Chechen customs: the groom or better to say, the one who is going to become the groom kidnaps the girl. The kidnapper persuades several of his peers, and now a group of armed young people with anim at the head is looking for the intended girl; seizing the moment the girl is seized and galloped to the groom's house. If the abduction is noticed by relatives girls, then an armed chase is organized, which can easily lead to a uniform battle between the kidnappers and the persecutors; the persecutors could recapture the girl, and this would be the greatest shame for the kidnappers; on the other hand, the murders possible in such circumstances led to an endless series of blood revenge; therefore, the kidnappers applied every effort to t ohm to make the chase pointless. The kidnappers brought the girl to the house of one of the relatives or peers of the groom, after which the groom could call on the mullah, who, having pronounced the above marriage formula, legalized, so to speak, the abduction; after that, the girl continued to stay in the house where she was brought, while negotiations began on the material side of the marriage; at the end of these negotiations, the "swing" rite was performed, that is, the final legalization of marriage, and the girl moved to the groom's house as his wife. Usually the kidnapper first tried to find out the attitude of the kidnapped girl towards him and firmly decided to abduct, only after making sure that the girl was disposed towards him. But there were cases, though leading to dire consequences, when a girl was abducted in the truest sense of the word, against her will, against the will of even her parents. One has only to imagine this as the custom-illuminated right of every man to appropriate any unmarried woman to himself, in order to understand what place in Chechen society was given to a Chechen woman. So, a Chechen could get himself a bride by kidnapping any girl he liked. The kidnapping of the girl did not at all mean that the groom could not come to terms peacefully with her parents; to obtain a bride for oneself by kidnapping meant gaining universal approval and fame as a "real" man. But nevertheless, the family of the kidnapped considers itself gravely offended, and if during the time no intermediaries came from the side of the kidnapped clan, then the offended clan could start military operations. But such intermediaries usually came, they were treated to corn cakes and lamb, and discussed with them questions about "Urdu", about compensation for an insult, etc .; in such cases, the marriage usually went well after a while. But very often the abduction of girls was due to the unwillingness of the parents to marry her off to the given groom, in such cases more serious clashes could occur between the clans, ending in a relationship of blood revenge - "mustugulla"; but this latter rarely happened, since the ancient custom was still on the side of the kidnapper. And in this case, the girl was viewed by both parents and kidnappers not as an independent human being, but simply as an object that the parents possessed and which the groom sought to acquire. Thus, the custom, like the Sharia, did not recognize a girl's right to control her own destiny; But we saw above that, in fact, Chechen girls had some opportunity to show their will and, although this opportunity was extremely limited, still Chechens were not completely impersonal creatures. But the girl got married and began a harsh life full of obligations for her. It should be noted that, despite the fact that the Sharia law permits marriage at any age, from the cradle to the deepest old age, the Chechens got married and got married mostly relatively late: girls aged 16-18, boys - more often, then, when they ceased to be young men and turned into mature men. So, as soon as a woman got into her (husband's) house, the work of housekeeping was piled on her shoulders, and this work in any peasant farm, especially in the mountains, is extremely much. we have seen, sometimes real engineering work; there you have to be both a bricklayer and an excavator and a loader, in addition to performing heavy agricultural work itself. On the plane, you often have to monitor irrigation canals, which is also a big work in itself. almost exclusively a woman on his shoulders; a Chechen, at best, takes part in sowing and mowing meadows; after all, he is a fighter, a defender of the family and clan, it is indecent for him to bog down in everyday and peaceful labor. farm: she monitors the condition of her sheep and cows, she makes supplies of milk and dairy products, she collects wool and processes it into mountain ukno, in beetroots, and in other accessories of men's and women's suits. Indeed, a Chechen woman is a "small universal factory", working tirelessly all year round. If these labors would reward her sufficiently, if at home. herself she saw contentment and prosperity, then her situation would not be so difficult; wealth would provide her with the opportunity to have at least some rest; but the Chechen family, especially in the state's disdainful attitude towards women; 1 at any time the husband could send his wife away, which would be the greatest shame for her; moreover, it was not considered as an insult to the wife's family and did not cause family enmity; the husband was only obliged to return the "kebin-hakk", that is, dowry, as well as Urdu, and that ended his obligations. And there were always enough "wiring" in the Chechen villages. But “the divorce was associated with the loss of a well-established labor force, with damage to the economy and to the tranquility of the owner; therefore, the Chechen preferred to cruelly “teach” his wife for the slightest offense, so that beaten women were not uncommon in the everyday life of Chechen families. At the first Chechen regional congress of women-members of village councils, which took place in October 1927, the delegates in their very first speeches recalled the terrible beatings that the Chechen women had dutifully endured as a necessary part of their life. "We must firmly remember," said the delegate of Arsanov, "how our husbands beat us ..." Endless labor, constant childbirth on a dirty floor, unlimited servicing to her husband and how me-Yilo a woman's rights for all ego — constant beatings. The woman was isolated from the rest of society, she was entirely dependent on the whim of her husband; adat said that a husband could kill his wife's lover who was caught in the act with impunity; there could be no revenge for this murder. We see that the restraining forces of tribal relations did not act in relation to the woman, which alone set the boundaries for the arbitrariness of individual members of Chechen society. A Chechen woman was in the complete power of a man, first as a daughter, then as a wife. But despite this, the Chechen woman, not only as a wayward girl, demanded the qualities of a stern warrior from her fiance; becoming a wife, she knew how to courageously share with her husband all those heavy hardships to which the wolfish way of abrogacy had doomed; and we know how often a Chechen had to take this path. Moreover, there were cases when the Chechen women themselves were made doomed and, together with their husbands, raised fear in the Caucasian administration. Now all this is in the past. The Soviet regime is opening all the ways for the Chechen woman so that she can go free with all her masses and build a better future for herself with her own hands.
3. The October Revolution and the ways to emancipate a Chechen woman
After the October Revolution and until the spring of 1920, the North Caucasus in general, and Chechnya in particular, was the theater of a fierce civil war. When the old regime fell, all the tension of the national and land issues immediately came to light in Chechnya; but it immediately became clear that opposing interests of the Chechens and the Cossacks clashed here; this opposition of interests was felt especially sharply between the poorest Chechen population in the mountains and the prosperous Cossacks on the plane. We already know what was the essence and basis of these contradictions — they were the necessary result of the violent colonialist and Russification policy of the old regime government. IN! 1918-1920 the region of flat Chechnya was under the rule of Denikin's white armies, relying on the Cossack population and army. The counter-revolution continued, in relation to the Chechens, the violent policy of the old government, it tied itself with the interests of the wealthy Cossack population and thus acquired the worst enemy in the person of the overwhelming poorest part of the Chechen people. The auls and mountains of Chechnya provided hospitable shelter to the red insurgent units on the Terek, and their chief, Comrade. Gikalo, who in the end Yub 'united these units into the 12th army. In the spring of 1920, the North Caucasus joined the RSFSR, and Chechnya then became part of the Mountain Autonomous Republic, which by 1924 was divided into several national units and districts, one of which was the Chechen Autonomous National Region. The Soviet government led the national-territorial delimitation of the North Caucasus on new foundations, the main goal of which was the possibility of national self-determination for each of the peoples living in the region. Chechnya received those lands on the plane, which were taken away from it by the Russian government in the early 19th century, for which the population of 4 Cossack villages was accordingly regrouped. This provided the material foundation for the work on the regulation of Chechen land use. The administration of the Oblast was formed on the basis of national autonomy and with extreme caution began Soviet construction. The whole difficulty of this task will be easy to understand if we recall at least those few information about the Chechen people that are given in this book above. The creation of a state apparatus that should interfere in intergeneric relations with the help of its Chechen agents requires extraordinary self-sacrifice from these latter; militiamen, for example, who, on the one hand, must carry out the orders of the authorities on arrests, etc., on the other, as members of a clan organization, are exposed for their actions to the danger of blood feud. In fact, any member of the Regional Government is in this position. Of course, the condition that facilitates the work is the sympathetic attitude of the broad masses of the people towards the Soviet regime, but this is precisely why the work of state and cultural construction had to and must be promoted; at a slow pace. At present, the foundation has been laid for cultural development among the Chechen people, primarily by the fact that, so to speak, the Chechen writing system has been constructed; this most important moment in the cultural life of every nation, which for a part of European peoples took place at least two millennia ago, for the Chechens happened quite recently, today, after the annexation of Chechnya to the Soviet Union. The sounds of Chechen speech are conveyed in Latin letters, and now in Grozny the newspaper "Serdloo" - "Svet" is published in the Chechen language, books and textbooks are being printed; word from now on the Chechen people will record their life experience with the help of the printed word. The significance of this fact is so enormous that it is simply impossible to assess it in short words. Further, a solid foundation has been laid for public education by setting up a network of 105 first-level schools, instead of 2-3 schools available for Chechen children in pre-revolutionary times. Work is underway to eradicate illiteracy, two technical schools for Chechen youth, pedagogical and agricultural, have been founded.Much has been achieved in the provision of medical care to the population; most of the main settlements of Chechnya now have hospitals and outpatient clinics, the attendance of which is growing every month. As for the old "adats", many of which are incompatible with Soviet social and state life, their elimination should be a matter of a not very, near future ... First of all, this includes the custom of "mustugul-la"; recently a special commission for the elimination of blood feud was organized, which included all Chechens respected by age and status; this commission was supposed to reconcile by the established custom by means of all available "bloodlines"; her work everywhere on the plane was a complete success, and required extreme stress. But for the future, the activities of this commission, of course, did not extend and individual families continue to become “mustugulla” to each other. This campaign has not yet been carried out in the mountains. One of the most important issues of social and domestic construction in Chechnya is, as elsewhere in the East, the question of women; for it is impossible to lead a people to socialism whose woman is enslaved before this enslavement is eliminated. But working on the emancipation of a Muslim woman means touching not only the old customs, but also the Muslim religion itself, which, as we have seen, provides for an absolutely dependent and humiliated position of women. To snatch a Muslim woman from the power of a man means to deprive him of the property that belonged to him for centuries, with all the material benefits that the possession of this property brought. The emancipation of a Chechen woman, thus, represents the deepest social revolution, which, at the same time, is one of the most the first and impatient tasks of the revolution. How did the central Soviet and party bodies approach the resolution of this, at first glance, almost insoluble issue? Considering the present cultural state of the Chechen people, as well as the specific hatred among the masses of the state for coercive measures that was created as a result of the actions of the tsarist administration, The Chechen autonomous national power has so far little intervened in the family and everyday life of the Chechens by legislative means. Therefore, it would not be a particular exaggeration to say that at present in Chechnya the most revolutionary institution is the Chechen Department of Workers and Peasant Women under the Regional Committee of the All-Union Communist Party. Step by step, slowly | and (cautiously [attracted the attention of the dark [and downtrodden female masses, the Chechen “Zhenotdel” won their trust. It sent experienced and seasoned workers to remote auls, who organized their own small headquarters under the district and volost executive committees). Every Chechen woman could come here with a complaint about some kind of (drinking male violence, or simply for advice in difficult cases of her difficult life. Of course, in the beginning, few decided on such a revolutionary violation of the age-old submission of a Chechen woman to male will; but when the chenenks began to gradually become convinced that the women's department can help and helps, that men are forced to reckon with this institution, the women's departments began to acquire wide confidence of the female masses. The women's departments awakened in the Chechen woman the consciousness of her civic East. In Chechnya, the best form of work among women turned out to be organizational ia "women's circles" at the local branch organizations; these circles gradually grew around these organizations, most often by attracting first the wives and relatives of local Soviet and party workers; From time to time, women's meetings were organized, at which the village "spite of the day" and the personal affairs of individual participants and questions of domestic and foreign policy of the USSR were discussed. Such meetings were the only place where Chechen women could abandon their daily domestic life, where, feeling like hostesses, they could spend time with pleasure and benefit. It is not surprising that the popularity of these gatherings grew rapidly, more and more women circles arose, and the number of the former increased. At present, the total number of female circles in Chechnya reaches 46, each comprising 30–120 women; this can already be considered a conquered base for the further development of the women's movement. The strength of this base is evidenced by the fact that now there are regular women's meetings in 42 auls, with 1,457 permanent members. These meetings are the first and very effective school for the social and political education of the Chechen woman; here the connecting threads are drawn between the oppressed female masses and their representatives in the Revolution — the Department of Workers and Peasant Women. Since 1927, women's delegate meetings have also been organized, regular meetings of the female “activist”, which has emerged from the female mass grouping around the women's departments. We can, to a certain extent, regard female delegates as the first Chechen women working for the emancipation of a Chechen woman; while they pass, tay say, the alphabet of social literacy, but maybe not much time will pass, and; the current timid students will turn into energetic teachers. There is now in Chechnya a women's club in the village of Alkhan-Yurt on the plane, which it has now decided to turn into an exemplary one. This club occupies a special and fairly large premises, with very clean and comfortable rooms; a drill workshop is organized here and there is occasional training in other handicrafts. But the main content of the club work is social and political; the club is attended by up to 170 Chechen women, it is also a permanent place of women's delegate meetings; delegates show great jealousy for the performance of their public duties, for the most part, they are middle-aged and elderly women, and if they cannot come to the next meeting, they often send their daughters to make appropriate statements; this small detail shows well what a profound shift has taken place in the mass of the old generation of Chechen women. At delegate meetings of the Alkhan of the Yurlov club, broad public issues are often discussed; great success, for example, are the conversations about the women's movement in the West, about the position of women in Russia and in Chechnya before the revolution and now; it is easy to understand that such questions touch the delegates for a living and are sufficiently "relevant" topics to revolutionize the inert thought of Chechen women and direct it along the public channel. Facts show that the work of women's circles and delegate meetings has yielded real practical results; it is a Chechen woman who is gradually beginning to act as a social and even political worker, going beyond her passive role in women's circles and delegate meetings. We currently have 560 women out of 3,300 members of the Chechen cooperation; moreover, the Chechen woman has also penetrated into active workers of the cooperative society: throughout the region we find 30 women among the members of the board of cooperatives. Women are especially active in the "Peasant Societies for Mutual Aid" (KOV'ah). The KOV's are predominantly a cooperative organization of agricultural credit, brought about by the complex lease relations in the Chechen countryside and, in general, the extreme instability of most Chechen farms. It is clear that the main worker of these farms, their labor force, a woman, is vitally interested in the work of KOV, who comes to the aid of the peasant in difficult times. But it is worthy of all attention that now the Chechen woman herself decides to go to a public institution for help, she herself takes part in its work, and does not grant, as it was quite recently, this leading role to a man. Among the members of the KOV there are 129 women, of which 66 are on the presidiums, 58 are members of the audit commissions; finally, there are mountain women among the KOV's directorships. Of the 129 participants, 124 are active workers — these numbers speak for themselves. Even more revealing is the performance of a Chechen woman in the political arena, as a member of the village council, and here we see the results of the persistent and long-term work of women's departments. Two years ago there were only a few Chechen women in the village councils; now there are about 800 of them. When the women's departments finally succeeded in moving the inert mass of Chechen women, the results of persistent preparatory work immediately affected. And observers from the localities report that mountain women do not passively enter the village council, but show themselves to be active and businesslike members; they vigorously oppose attempts to resolve matters "on a family basis," that is, leave old economic relations unchanged; this is understandable, since the overwhelming majority of these representatives of the emancipating Chechen woman belong to the poor and middle peasant stratum, and almost half of them are widows and divorced. In other words, the most disadvantaged women, both economically and socially, get to the village councils, the more acutely they feel their female powerlessness; this fact is, of course, extremely favorable for further work on the liberation of the Chechen woman, since the banner of struggle unfolded by the women's department immediately fell into reliable hands. The energy of this advanced female troop is all the more surprising since it emerged from a truly "dark kingdom." In relation to the Chechen people, it is generally difficult to talk about literacy, since we know that literacy simply did not exist in their native language; literacy in a foreign language is difficult and inaccessible to the masses. According to statistics from 1927, literacy (mainly in Russian) in Chechnya was 0.9%, that is, there were 9 literate per 1000 people, and among these 9 there were probably also non-Chechens. Nevertheless, we can talk about the literacy of Chechen women. The Chechen Narobraz faces the immense task of spreading education in an almost absolutely studentless country. This task is even more difficult in relation to the female mass; in 80 schools of the 1st level, 4,600 Chechen children study; only 250 of them are girls; but it is almost possible (I can probably say that if it were not for the help of the women's departments, many of these 250 would not have ended up in school; after all, the girl, as we have seen, is an employee in the family, and the school takes this worker away; according to the old there is no need for a girl to study male views, therefore, the head of the family would hardly let the girl go to school without sufficient “pressure” from women's and women's organizations. ”It inhibits girls' attendance at schools and their lack of warm outerwear, which, according to custom, women are not supposed to wear; In this regard, the work of the women's department also eases the situation. But, of course, the main attention of the women's departments is paid to adults, and here the Department of Workers and Peasant Women came to the aid of the Narobraz.At the Alkhan-Yurt club and in some other places, women's health centers have been established, where 259 Chechen women This figure cannot be denied as a significant achievement, given the general living conditions of a Chechen woman.The Chechen Department of Workers and Peasant Women also introduces vocational training for Chechen women; he organized several schools of sewing, drilling and hosiery, where over 100 women study. These schools have, of course, the strongest educational and developmental influence. In addition to learning a craft, here girls and women acquire social skills, receive some, it is true, very elementary and peculiar, but still political education. Through the women's divisions and institutions, the process of involving Chechen women in the Party and the Komsomol is underway; but, of course, according to the objective conditions described above, a Chechen-communist at the present time can only be a rare phenomenon; so it really is. As for the Komsomol organizations, they are much more accessible to a Chechen girl; she is involved in the Komsomol through vocational schools, or as a sister or relative of a Komsomol member. The Komsomol of Chechnya currently has 5,000 members, of which there are 89 Komsomol members; this figure is by no means small, if we take into account everything that has been said above about the Chechen woman; it must be remembered that each of these 89 is, so to speak, (power centers that exert (a strong and broad influence on the surrounding women! masses. The pioneer movement is developing quite successfully in Chechnya; the number of pioneer detachments reaches 3,000 children, and this, despite , for an extreme lack of leadership forces; but there are very few girls in the detachments. * Here, of course, all the same general living conditions, which, undoubtedly), will be overcome, thanks to the activities of all the same women's organizations; both the vocational school and the sovart school and the orphanage are places where girls are involved in pioneer movement; Chechen women usually come to the sewing school, to the vocational school, with their daughters, and the leaders use this circumstance for appropriate agitation. So, we see that thanks to the tremendous work done before Until now, by the Chechen Department of Workers and Peasant Women, the deeply backward and inert Chechen female mass has moved from its place and is now going to meet a new The 1st Regional Congress of Chechen women, members of the Oelsots, who gathered in Grozny in October 1927, was an excellent expression of this fact. The congress was attended by 146 female delegates representing the overwhelmed mass of Chechen women in village councils, female delegate meetings, etc. The age of those who gathered is interesting, first of all: 126 Chechen women were 24-40 years old and above, or 86.3 o / o were Chechens of pre-revolutionary generations; 78 out of 146, i.e. 53.40 / o of the women who gathered were widows and divorced; these figures show that the women's movement in Chechnya has captured the deepest strata of the female mass, and not only the youth. The Congress decisively discussed all major issues of internal politics; and it turned out that all these questions affect women in one way or another; and no wonder: the figure of a working woman can be made a symbol of the national economy of Chechnya. A very lively debate arose according to the reports of the Regional Land Administration, Health Department, Narobraz. The speakers were asked a lot of questions, which, on the one hand, reflected the great desire of women to take an active part in the construction of a new life, on the other hand, all those diverse (Obstacles encountered on the ground by a Chechen woman who wants to fight for her civil rights. and land reclamation, the delegates made very practical proposals, especially on the issue of water use on the plane. At the same time, bitter complaints were heard that the local authorities did not allow women to participate in public works, that they prevented girls from attending school, and that it was generally necessary to combat male oppression. It is interesting that according to the report of the Health Department, the delegates asked the speaker a lot of questions, many of which were of a very intimate nature. In general, the congress showed its full competence in construction issues, focusing most of its attention on land use and land management issues, as well as on the tasks of popular, mainly women's, education. It was decided to take all measures to involve girls in grade 1 schools, for which it was recommended to arrange, if possible, separate groups of girls; To eliminate illiteracy, it was considered necessary not only to establish educational centers, but, mainly, to arrange long-term courses for Chechen women, from where female illiteracy workers and women organizers in general would emerge. The 1st Regional Congress of Chechen Women, Members of Village Councils, was a bright and a clear proof that the first and most difficult steps on the path to the emancipation of the Chechen woman have already been taken. The Chechen woman emerged from her age-old imprisonment and energetically set about not only building her new and free life, but at the same time creating better conditions for the political and (economic life for the entire Chechen people as a whole. There is no special literature on the situation of Chechen women) There are separate instructions in general works on the ethnography of the Caucasus'; here it is necessary first of all to mention the work of Berge "Chechnya and the Chechens" in the "Caucasian calendar" for 1860, then the article by U. Laudaev in "Collections of information about the Caucasian Highlanders "; Leon-tovich" Adats of the Caucasian Highlanders. "Recently, a number of works on the North Caucasus have been published, one way or another (touching upon the issue of the position of Chechen women; from these works we point to: K. Batuyev" Zelimkhan " North Caucasus ";" About those who were called abreks "- published by Chechnarobraz; Martirosian" Socio-economic foundations of revolutionary movements on the Terek "; collection" North Caucasus after regionalization ", Rostov-on-Don. .1925.