1. Afghanistan is a country of Afghans
Afghanistan is our neighboring country. The entire northern border of Afghanistan is in contact with the Central Asian republics of our Union. In the west, it borders with Persia, in the south - with English Baluchistan, in the east - with India. It is an inaccessible mountainous country, crossed by the highest mountain ranges of the world, the Hindu Kush and others. Afghanistan, in terms of its area, is larger than France, half the size of Persia and 8 times larger than Belgium. The mountains of Afghanistan, covering four-fifths of the country's surface, are almost devoid of vegetation; only an insignificant part of them is covered with forests, and the sedentary population engaged in agriculture huddle along the river valleys, where proximity to water makes it possible to cultivate the land. The main water basins are the north, the basin of the r. Amu Darya and the southern one are the rivers flowing into the Indus and the basin of the Seistan salt lakes. Afghanistan's climate is as varied as its surface. Depending on the height above sea level, it can be either severe (on high mountains), then moderate (on middle elevations), then sultry-tropical (in lowlands). Summer and winter are abruptly replaced by each other; there is almost no spring or autumn. Modern independent Afghanistan is subdivided into 5 provinces: Kabul, Kandahar, Herat, Turkestan and Badakhshai and 4 districts: Jalalabad, Gerdis, Feraz and Maimene. This, in general, corresponds to the natural dissection of the surface of the country, which splits into 6 regions: low-lying Afghan Turkestan in the north, the Hindu-Kush mountain range, Badakhshan in the northeast, Kabul, the valley of the river of the same name south of Hindu-Kush , Hezaristan, which occupies the central part of Afghanistan, and Seistan in the west with the adjacent deserts from the south. Afghanistan is a poor country. Its natural wealth is insignificant and, moreover, is located in little accessible places, in mountain gorges and at an unattainable height. Steep mountain slopes are unsuitable for agriculture, because they do not retain water, and since four-fifths of the country's surface are mountains, there is very little land suitable for agriculture. These are mainly the Kabul valley, the valley of the Gerirud river (Herat province), Kandahar and Afghan Turkestan. The population of Afghanistan is heterogeneous. In addition to the main population, Afghans, other peoples of Iranian and Turkic origin live here in fairly large numbers. Afghans are an ancient people, mentioned by ancient Greek historians. Their origin is not exactly clear. They themselves consider themselves to be of Semitic origin, the descendants of ten Israelite tribes, who allegedly got there after the expulsion of the Jews from Judea. Their appearance, Semitic profile, black curly hair speaks in favor of this version, but their language testifies against it, which does not reveal traces of the Semitic language, except for the biblical names by which they like to call themselves, and a few other words that could have come into their use. and later. Judging by their language, they are Iranians (closely related to Persians, Tajiks, etc.), who have undergone some changes due to mixing with other races. The Afghans, who have long lived in mountain gorges, where the struggle for existence is very severe, have developed a militant freedom-loving character. Only in the XIII-XVI centuries, when the main population of present-day Afghanistan, the ancient Iranians and Indians, were driven out by the Turkic-Mongol hordes, the Afghans began to descend into the valleys. Here, mixing with the original population, as well as with the Turks and Mongols, they formed that special people, which is now known by the name of the Afghans. They adopted Islam in the 13th century. Afghans number about 2 million, of which R / g million live outside the borders of the present state of Afghanistan, in a strip of independent tribes bordering on English possessions. Thus, in Afghanistan itself, Afghans are a minority. The Afghans speak the Pashto language, but also in cities, and, until recently, in government institutions, Persian predominates, which is also the official language. The second large group of the population (more than a million) are Tajiks. These are the remains of the Iranians who once completely populated the territory of Afghanistan.Under the pressure of the conquerors, they huddled into the most remote inaccessible mountain gorges, like Badakhshan, Hezaristan, partly Afghan Turkestan, where there was nothing attractive for numerous conquerors, and they kept there]! their identity. Until the declaration of Afghanistan's independence in 1919, they were subjected to religious harassment, since in the majority they are Shiite Muslims, that is, different sense than the rest of the population. The official religion of Afghanistan is Sunni Muslims and Tajiks are very hardworking farmers. Driven to the most barren corners of the country, they carefully cultivate their tiny fields, several tens of square meters in size. Their sedentary life and the eternal fear of persecution made them very peace-loving, which makes them sharply different from the warlike Afghans. The next population group of importance is the Turkic group, to which the Uzbeks, Turkmens, Hezarians and aimags belong. This group, to a greater or lesser extent, carries Mongolian blood in its veins. Uzbeks and Turkmens live in Afghan Turkestan, the latter somewhat west and closer to Amu Darya. They differ little from each other in their occupations, lifestyle and religion (Sunnis). These are half-settled nomads, whose nomadic way of life still prevails over the sedentary one. They number about 800,000 people. Hezarians and aimags, or, as they are also called, char-aimaks, live in the central part of Afghanistan, in Herazistan. The former live in the east of this area, and the latter on the western branches of the Hindu-Kush. The Hezarians are predominantly agriculturalists, according to the religion of the Ismaelites (Muslim sect), the aimaks are Sunni Muslim nomads. Information about them is inconsistent, since they represent little-studied nationalities. Together they number about 600,000 people. A special place is occupied by the infidels, a poorly studied people inhabiting the mountain gorges to the north-east of Kabul, an area called Kafiristan (that is, the country of the "infidels"). Now this area has been renamed Nuristan (land of the world). These mountaineers of unknown origin, in their appearance sharply different from the rest of the population of Afghanistan (light skin, hair, eyes), were a constant threat to the sedentary population. They raided trade caravans and peaceful villages. At the end of the last century, an expedition of Afghan troops was sent to Kafiristan, which "with sword and fire" converted the kafirs to Islam. Now infidels are the most "trustworthy" supporters of the Afghan government. In addition, small groups of Indians, Jews, etc. live in cities. In economic terms, Afghanistan is a backward country. The population is mainly engaged in farming and cattle breeding. A small part is occupied by handicrafts. Industry is just spreading. Agriculture in Afghanistan is very primitive. Due to the lack of bearable communication routes, farmers are deprived of the opportunity to sell their products here, so agriculture has the character of a semi-subsistence economy. There are two ways} of treatment - irrigated and non-irrigated. Irrigation zeros, requiring careful maintenance and a whole system of irrigation canals, are found there. where the population finally settled on the earth lives. Non-irrigated fields are cultivated for the most part by semi-nomads who reap the harvest during their stay in this place. Of course, it makes no sense for them to engage in irrigation. They grow wheat, barley, millet, corn, dzhugara, rice and pods. Then tobacco, cotton, opium, hemp, lei. clover and alfalfa. Flax is not used for yarn, but for cattle feed and oil. Gardening and fruit growing are also flourishing. Afghan fruits and vegetables are very famous and they are one of the essential articles of the not extensive Afghan export. A total of 000,000 dessiatines are occupied under the crops, i.e. About 2% of the total area of ​​the country. Cattle breeding also takes a large place in the national economy of Afghanistan, and a very significant part of the population roams with their herds in search of pastures from one place to another, depending on the season. Afghanistan is rich in animals, thanks to its large grassy surface and climate diversity. Cattle, camels, and horses are bred. Of particular importance is the breeding of sheep for meat and skins (karakul). Handicrafts are very developed, and artisans have reached great perfection in the manufacture of carpets, woolen and silk fabrics, iron utensils, fine jewelry from non-ferrous and precious metals and pottery. Carpets and goods made of copper and iron are especially placed. The mining industry is completely undeveloped, although mineral deposits, salt, metals, coal and even oil in the bowels of Afghanistan have been discovered and mined in negligible quantities, and the size of these deposits has not been clarified. Afghans do not have the means to develop this wealth, and they do not want to allow foreigners to do this for fear of losing their independence. The manufacturing industry is in its infancy and is wholly owned by the state. In Kabul there is a woolen factory, a tannery and shoe factories, an arms factory, a soap factory, and a match factory. There is also a power station covering Kabul. All these enterprises are small in size and work mainly for the army. There are no railways in Afghanistan *), and there are very few dirt and highways and they are very inconvenient. The extent to which separate areas are isolated from each other can be judged by the fact that while there is not enough grain in the southern parts of the country, and there is plenty of it in Afghan Turkestan, bread is not delivered to the consuming areas, since transportation is too expensive. Recently *) A narrow-gauge railway was recently built between Kabul and Da-rulaman, the new capital under construction. Since then, automobile communication has been introduced, as well as airplane flights serving communications with foreign countries. Trade, both internal and external, is poorly developed. The entire annual foreign trade turnover does not exceed 30 million rubles. There are few cities. The main ones are: Kabul, the capital (150,000 inhabitants), Kandahar (20,000 inhabitants), Ghazni, south of Kabul, has 15,000 inhabitants, Mazar-i-Sheriff (15 to 20,000 inhabitants) and Herat, which once flourished and numbering 100,000 inhabitants, and now falling into decay (20,000 inhabitants). The social system of Afghanistan retained the features of semi-feudal relations. At the head of the ruling class is the heart. These are government officials from the tribal aristocracy, endowed with large land holdings. In the 19th century, after the penetration of the Russians and the British into Central Asia, part of the capital accumulated by the Serdars began to go into trade. This caused a dismemberment of the heart - some of the Serdars involved in trade form a new class of commercial capitalists, who, however, do not break their ties with the land. This class was the main pillar of the new system in Afghanistan. The clergy, who also owned land plots (church feudalism), adjoins the serdars. The clergy, who lost all their advantages under the new system, are sharply, reactionary and hostile to the young padishah and his reforms. The peasantry, together with the pastoralists making up 80% of the population, is exploited by landowners and clergy and government officials. Finally, the small urban bourgeoisie: small traders, artisans and handicraftsmen are entirely on the side of reforms and the new system. The geographical position of Afghanistan, nicknamed by British politicians "the gateway of India", has determined its political history. Indeed, possessing the only passages leading from India to Russia, to Persia and to China, Afghanistan has long attracted the attention of British and tsarist imperialism, seeking to possess the "keys to the gates of India." Throughout the nineteenth century and early twentieth century, this struggle for influence in Afghanistan was fought with varying happiness between England and Russia and through military force and diplomatic negotiations. During this struggle, between the two predators, mainly under Abdur-Rahman (1880- 1901), Afghanistan, under the influence of a formidable danger, from a weak non-centralized state, consisting of a number of semi-independent regions, turned into a single despotic monarchy, annexing a number of rebellious outskirts to the main possessions. England, taking advantage of Russia's difficulties in other regions, is gradually expanding its influence in Afghanistan, and in 1907 England and Russia conclude a treaty (convention) according to which Russia, for concessions made to it in Persia and Turkey, "recognizes Afghanistan outside the sphere of Russian influence." and undertakes to communicate with Afghanistan only through the mediation of the British Government, while England declares that she is not going to change the political situation in Afghanistan. Thus, Afghanistan has retained the appearance of an independent state. From that moment on, the British finally consolidated their influence in Afghanistan, which was actually established under Abdur-Rahman. Relying on the weak-willed emir Habibullah Khan, who replaced his enterprising father Abdur-Rahman, the British became the masters of the country, and the emir, who received an English subsidy, actually became the executor of the will of England. Afghanistan, probably, would have become a colony of England if not for the world war, which, as is known, disrupted many plans of imperialism, although it was waged precisely in the interests of this latter. During the World War, a German-Turkish mission was admitted to Afghanistan, which conducted propaganda among government circles against the British for the unification of Muslim states. Khabibullah Khan demanded a German or Turkish corps in case of a move against the British in India. He played a double game with the German-Turkish mission, but ultimately he failed to use the predicament for the British in order to liberate his country. He continued his carefree harem life as before, leaving all the government of the country to a clique of court careerists and governors. The people were extremely dissatisfied with the rule of Khabibullah. For his obedience to the British, he was nicknamed the "English lackey" (nuker); In the advanced circles of the Afghan merchants and officials, a group of nationalists was born from among young people who had traveled abroad, which began to agitate for the independence of Afghanistan. In 1911, the journal Seraj-ul-Akbar was founded. A small group of Afghan nationalists, mln and pre-Afghans, to whom also belonged the third son of Khabibullah, Amanullah-hai, the current emir of Afghanistan, prepared a palace coup. In 1919, in the spring of Khabibullah was killed on the hunt and Amanullah Khan entered the throne, contrary to the laws on succession to the throne. He enjoyed the support of a group of nationalist-minded officials, merchants and the army, which expressed popular indignation against the emir and Serdars, who had sold themselves to the British. Here, of course, our October Revolution was important, which also influenced this backward country. The coup, in the same year, caused a declaration of war from the outside Fig. 1. Street of Kabul, England. As a result of this war, although it ended in the defeat of the Afghans, a treaty was concluded between Britain and Afghanistan, and in which the emir refused the subsidy, but England was deprived of the right to interfere in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and control its foreign policy. Thus, Afghanistan became an independent state. Our October Revolution contributed to this not only in the sense that it prepared the minds of the leaders of this Eastern despotism, but also in that. the fact that Soviet Russia, having proclaimed the self-determination of peoples, erased all imperialist tendencies in the history of Russia, and ceased to be dangerous for neighboring countries. That this is exactly the case and that it was taken into account by the Afghans can be judged by the fact that the young emir Amanullah Khan immediately after accession to the throne turned to the chairman of the Council of People's Commissars, Comrade. Lenin, with a telegram of welcome, in which he invited the Soviet government to enter into normal diplomatic relations with Afghanistan. Soviet Russia was the first to recognize the independence of Afghanistan, “even before the conclusion of the Anglo-Afghan treaty, and this was of great moral importance for the young Afghan state in its struggle for national independence. The reforms undertaken by the young emir and vigorously pursued by him upon accession to the throne were aimed at destroying the feudal system and clearing the way for commercial capital, a new force in the state on which modern Afghanistan relies. The blow on the feudal was strictly carried out by the emir, the abolition of slavery, the abolition of the "bekar" - compulsory free labor service of the population, a kind of corvee, the replacement of the tax in kind with a uniform monetary tax, the confiscation of the vakuf (church) lands and the deprivation of subsidies to the nobility. The following reforms served to revive trade and facilitate trade turnover: 1) the abolition of numerous internal customs offices, through which transported goods had to pass, and the introduction of a single customs tariff, in which the duty is levied once, instead of the previous 12-14 fees; 2) the centralization of state power and 3) the proclamation of bourgeois freedoms, such as: equality of nationalities, freedom of personality, religion, inviolability of property, home and correspondence, and even freedom of the press. True, not all of these freedoms, especially the last three, are realized in practice, but their proclamation alone characterizes the course of reforms taken. A number of activities are also aimed at raising the culture of the people. Secular schools have been opened, in which the exact and social sciences are taught. Foreign teachers and instructors have been invited. The reforms related to the emancipation of women will be discussed below, in the chapter on the Afghan woman after the reforms.

2. Life of Afghans and the position of women.
As we have seen, the population of Afghanistan consists of elements heterogeneous in origin and occupation, semi-nomadic, semi-settled, living in a wide variety of natural and living conditions. There is, of course, a big difference between the inhabitants of Kabul, where there is even some European comfort, and the inhabitants of the outskirts, living in yurts or even in caves, both culturally and in everyday life. Therefore, it is easy to understand that not only the poor and the rich, landowners, merchants, peasants and artisans live differently, but the lives of people in different regions also differ sharply from each other and, consequently, the position of women in the family is also different. We will try to find what is common to all Afghans in their relationship to women, and to note those features that distinguish, in this respect, one group of the population from another. This common is reflected, first of all, in the religion of Afghans, in Islam, which has its Sharia law based on the Koran (the holy scriptures of Muslims) and traditions. A special feature of Sharia is precisely that it determines the daily routine of a person's life in the most precise way, down to the smallest details. Marriage law, for example, is so thoroughly developed that it is precisely indicated what even the most intimate relationship between husband and wife should be. This gives a certain stability to family relations in all Muslim countries. But the Sharia is only a certain leveling factor. It would be a mistake to think that in all Muslim countries the position of women is the same. Indeed, we see that the position of a Muslim woman varies not only from country to country, but also in the same country, as, for example, in Afghanistan it is not the same among different classes or groups of the population. nomads or semi-nomads, where the husband grazes cattle, goes hunting, and the wife does all the hard household work and, moreover, is forced to follow her husband along difficult mountain passages, then, of course, she wins back certain rights for herself, and they cannot those restrictions that are observed among sedentary farmers be imposed. Here a number of works are performed by a man, since a woman is not capable of building a house, plowing a mountain field, etc. Therefore, a woman loses her independence, and she becomes a driven creature; where the owner is so rich that oh can completely remove her from the economy, she completely loses her freedom. The second thing that all Afghans have in common, of course, to varying degrees, is strong remnants of the family life. Ancestral life, with its terrible offspring, blood feud, is a real scourge of the Afghan population. If in a fight someone killed another, the closest relative of the killed person must take revenge on the culprit, and the family of the killed person will calm down until revenge is taken. Since these fights happen very often, especially over "women, money or land", whole villages are in a state of constant enmity and entire tribes are subject to extinction. The extent to which this enmity reaches can be judged by the following incident: In one village, in which houses were located on both sides of a single street, there was a fight. It so happened that the residents of one side of the street were in one party of the fighting, and the residents of the other side were in the other party. As a result of this fight, incidents of blood feud arose, and residents on both sides of the street found themselves in an irreconcilable feud. There was a constant firefight and in order to get to the well, which was at the end of the street, residents broke through the doors from the sides of the houses and so, under the cover of the walls, moved from house to house in order to collect water. At the well, it was agreed not to shoot. Sometimes women are drawn into this enmity. Travelers report many cases when a woman picks up a rifle in order to avenge her brother or other close relative. But this, of course, is among nomadic tribes, where tribal remnants are still strong and the woman is not hidden in a dark half-house. But let us now turn to an examination of the life of certain important groups of the population and the position of women among them. If we take agricultural regions, like Afghan Turkestan, we will see that here the land belongs mainly not to landowners engaged in agriculture, but to buyers \ lands from among officials and merchants who themselves continue to live in the city, and the land is cultivated by the peasants - "dekhans" on the terms of the gigantic. This is explained by the fact that buying land in Afghanistan is the most reliable and profitable way of saving. Where the land is fertile, there are large landowners, and the worse the land or the conditions of cultivation, the less often landowners' land is found and the more peasants there are living on their land. The land is cultivated in a primitive way - with a plow on a pair of bulls, or even just with a shovel, since the owner of two bulls is already a wealthy peasant.Irrigated land is cultivated better and more thoroughly. Fertilization is not produced. It must be said that it is equally difficult for a peasant to live both on the landlord's and on his own land: in the first case, he has to give the landlord the lion's share of his harvest, and on his land he is entirely dependent on the local chiefs of "alak-gifts", who disregarding the instructions of the center ("far from the center"), they rob the peasants at their own discretion. The fear of the peasants before these insatiable "alakdars" is so great that (according to the testimony of one of our comrades who recently returned from Afghanistan), seeing the alakdar from afar, the peasants turn off the path so as not to meet him. Thus, both the peasant-owner and the "chariker", that is, working on the land of the landowners, uses an insignificant part of the fruits of his labor. In accordance with this, his life is unpretentious, rather poor. The peasants live in clay houses or in yurts, which, as needed, are moved closer to the place of field work, or even in caves. Afghan farmers live in villages in several yards, depending on the amount of land suitable for farming and the conditions of cultivation. Inside the house, in the middle of the room, there is a hearth dug in the ground, and in city houses there is a special brazier for charcoal called "mankal". The hearth or mankal serve both to warm the dwelling and for (cooking. There are almost no signs of 'furniture in the room. It is replaced by blankets, skins, carpets or, mats, pillows. The master's goods are kept in chests, here they are called "sanduk", which are placed Rarely, already as a luxury, one can see in the house of an Afghan a bed "char-pai" (literally - a four-knuckle), or even a camp bed, accidentally inherited by its owner. Afghans eat mainly flour food, wheat or barley cakes, and vegetables. Meat is used very rarely, although the national dish is "pilaf", made from fatty lamb and rice. This dish is available only for wealthy people. The food of the poor is dry bread, no wonder the word "nan" - bread, is also used to denote words lunch. The life of nomads is even simpler. The yurt is the center of their whole life. It is made of felt, mainly black, but there are also gray and white, depending on the color of the wool of the sheep, since the wool is finite but not stained. Spending most of their time in transitions from one pasture to another, nomads on the passes collect a yurt, in which and around which all vital processes take place. Here and cattle are slaughtered "they milk animals, prepare food, wash clothes, etc., etc. The cultural level of Afghans is very low. We have information about folk medicine in Afghanistan. As a preventive measure against diseases, Afghans use amulets: a piece paper, with an inscription from the Koran and consecrated by the mullah, is embedded in a leather bag or medallion of silver and worn around the neck or on the arm.The population of Afghanistan is still so ignorant that they still believe in the miraculous power of such amulets.You will not meet a single Afghan, even the poorest worker, without such an amulet.Of the medical techniques Afghans use bloodletting and laxatives, and in such large sizes that these funds often lead to a sad end.In case of severe hemorrhage or when an arm or leg is cut off, the wound is filled with boiling oil or a limb drops into a bowl of boiling oil.In case of minor wounds, the wound is covered with ashes.In case of fever, no matter what origin, the patient is wrapped in the fresh skin of a newly killed goat, and covered with a blanket. This causes sweating and sometimes helps, although it greatly weakens the patient. Another way of "ladies" is to burn the body with a piece of cloth dipped in oil. This method is used for a variety of diseases: indigestion, neuralgia, rheumatism, headache, etc. Mullahs, fakirs, healers who have no idea of ​​medicine, they wander from one place to another and cause colossal harm to the population, are engaged in treatment, With no control over themselves. Malaria, smallpox, tuberculosis, cholera, bloody diarrhea and syphilis are very common in Afghanistan. When attempts were made to introduce smallpox vaccination at the end of the last century, this measure was met with very hostility, but soon the population became convinced of the enormous benefits of smallpox vaccination and now, albeit with some caution, they go to the points where smallpox is inoculated. This method of treatment is called "zan". In general, Afghans, urged by ignorant mullahs, everywhere opposed the introduction of European medicine in their country. Several times foreigners founded hospitals in Kabul, and every time a doctor left, his successor did not find a hospital. Hospital buildings were turned into warehouses for war materials or rented out for other purposes. Here is the background against which the life of a woman unfolds. If we add that slavery existed in Afghanistan until recently, that the law "an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth" is being fulfilled, that is, literally, but the eyes are gouged out, arms, legs, noses are cut off - it will become clear that the position of a woman here is at a correspondingly low level. In fact, the position of a woman in Afghanistan is quite aptly defined by the statement of one learned English traveler. He writes: "Although a woman is not treated badly, she is considered to be property." Yes, in Afghanistan until very recently, and to a large extent to this day, women are considered property. A woman is bought as a wife, a father sells his daughters, a brother of sisters to their future husbands. At the same time, note that this is not a question of a slave captured from a tribe of "infidels" (there are also men as slaves), but of the most devout Muslim woman. To characterize the psychology of an Afghan, let us give an example that immediately introduces the essence of a man's relationship with a woman: In a fit of jealousy or anger, an Afghan man cut off his wife's nose. (This happens quite often and a special surgical operation has been developed there, thanks to which the disfigured face is somewhat corrected: part of the forehead skin is pulled to the nose). Then, recollecting himself, the Afghan went with his wife to the hospital of one mission, where the doctor told him that it was impossible to perform a conventional operation, since his wife had a too small forehead, and advised him to prescribe an artificial nose from London, which would cost 30 rupees (about 15 rubles ). The Afghan man thought about it and, when the doctor asked what he was thinking, said: “I think that the nose will cost 30 rupees, and for 80 rupees I can buy a new wife.” This was said in the most ordinary tone, and it was not hooliganism from the point of view of an Afghan, but a simple everyday calculation. The Afghans have firmly adopted the view of women as property, more or less profitably acquired, and we will see that even after the reforms, not much has been changed in this respect. The wife is bought, and once the price has been paid he can do with his property as he pleases. Afghans enter into marriages only after reaching adulthood, i.e. a man at 20 years old (when the beard grows back), and a woman at 15-16 years old. In the eastern part of the country, where the influence of India is stronger, as well as in cities, marriages are concluded earlier, at the age of 15-12. Wealthy Afghans marry even younger, sometimes even before puberty. The age difference between the rich and the poor is explained, of course, by the need to save up money to buy out his wife. Various tribes marry freely, marry both Tajiks and Persians. According to Muslim law, an Afghan has the right to support four wives and an unlimited number of concubines, but this right is enjoyed only by wealthy people or people who for a household or enterprise (like, nair., Handicraftsmen) workers are required. The choice of the bride is done as follows. A matchmaker from the husband's relatives is sent to the alleged bride; she examines the bride and reports what she saw to her husband's parents. Then, when the consent of the parents of both parties has been previously clarified and the ransom amount has been established, the groom's father, accompanied by relatives, goes to the bride's father. At the same time, the bridegroom's relatives visit the bride's mother. The father hands over the ring sent by the groom and asks the bride's father to agree that his son become his (the bride's father) servant. The bride's father answers: "for good." Then, treats are brought and passages from the Koran are recited. The bride's father presents minor gifts to the groom, and the engagement is considered perfect. Between the engagement and the wedding, 2-3 months pass, but sometimes 2-3 years, depending on the groom's funds, because the wedding cannot take place until the ransom is paid to the bride's parents. At this time, a dowry is prepared for the bride, consisting of clothes and household items, but the ransom amount is always greater than the value of the dowry. In villages where women go without a veil, the choice is freer, the groom sees the bride himself and there are cases of brides being taken away. In view of such a long time between engagement and wedding, premarital meetings are practiced in some places. The bride and groom meet with the assistance of the mother, but secretly from the father. Kisses are allowed, but not sexual intercourse. These secret meetings are called "entertainment of the betrothed" (naumzud bazi). This custom is widespread among the nobility. Even the emirs often went to the “naumzud bazi” at midnight. A marriage is concluded by an agreement signed by a judge, and the formal consent of the bride and groom is required to conclude this agreement. In addition to the executions (judge) and both parties, the contract is signed by witnesses. The contract is handed over to the wife; the husband can divorce his wife without giving any reasons. A woman cannot do this. If she wants to divorce her husband, she can turn to the judge if she has good reason to do so. But this is very rarely practiced, a woman is so downtrodden that she does not dare to exercise her right. The contract provides for the provision of the woman in the event of divorce or the death of her husband. When the contract is signed, the hands and feet of the bride and groom are covered with one henna veil. The day after the conclusion of the contract, the wedding procession departs from the bride's house to the groom's house. During this procession, young people dance to the sound of music, show different riding techniques, a group of older youths dance the national tribal dance with sabers. At the groom's house, the bride is handed over to the groom. The wedding feast begins, but what will a woman expect in her husband's house? The woman is completely hidden from the gaze of strangers. She lives in a special half, carefully fenced off from the rooms in which men spend time and where they receive guests. She rarely goes outside, and when she appears, she is covered with a veil that falls to her heels. This veil "burka" does not even have a full cutout at the eyes, like women in other Muslim countries. In Afghan women, this neckline is covered with some kind of mesh mart. 2. An Afghan woman with a veil. teria, muslin, etc. Through such a mesh it is very difficult to see and the eyes get sick from the tension. The rest of the Afghan outfit? consists of wide trousers, a long shirt with long sleeves, stockings and shoes. Hair, braided in small braids, is covered with a scarf, and a skullcap over it. For the street, the described burka or "chadur" is still worn. In a rich family, a woman is completely isolated, she does not dare to appear in a room when guests are there. Nobody talks about her or talks about her. It is considered 'indecent to inquire about the health of a wife or daughter. Leading a well-fed, monotonous life, devoid of any reasonable occupations, withdrawn from even participating in the household and without leaving the female half for days on end, she quickly turns into her husband's toy, greedy for jewelry and sweets. Few women, even those of the wealthy classes, can read, and being able to write was considered reprehensible for a woman. After all, she could use her knowledge to correspond with her lover! An Afghan woman is also susceptible to her husband's outbursts of jealousy, which Afghans, with their fighting nature, are especially harsh, as we saw in the example of a woman with a cut off nose. However, Mohammedan law allows a husband to beat his wives, but Afghans consider it reprehensible to use this right. Therefore, as an everyday phenomenon - beating "wives" in Afghanistan is absent. As a mother, the Afghan woman enjoys certain respect, and in raising children she plays a major role in the family. We will not dwell in more detail on the life of a wealthy Afghan woman, because she is not much different from harem life of a woman in any eastern country where Sharia dominates. 3. Working woman of Afghanistan
There is no industrial proletariat in Afghanistan. Several thousand workers employed in a few factories and plants, in the short period of existence of most of these enterprises, have not yet managed to develop a special working life and influence the life of the rest of the population. There is no doubt that in the future, with the growth of Afghan industry, the cadre of workers and their share in the life of the country will also grow, but at present, when we talk about a working woman in Afghanistan, we mean an Afghan peasant woman and an Afghan nomad. Both take part, moreover, very active, in household work, and some production processes are performed exclusively by women. Because of this, a woman here acquires a certain freedom both in the sense of movement and in the sense of the manifestation of her personality. The legal status of both peasant women and nomadic pastoralists before the law remains, of course, the same as that of a woman-city dweller and a woman of privileged classes, but the customs and lifestyle of these strata of the population give them somewhat more freedom and do not bind them by such complex fetters prejudice. In a peasant family, a woman does all the housework; along with her husband, she works in the field, helping him to clear the numerous small canals through which water flows to irrigate the fields. She grinds flour in a hand mill, spins wool on a primitive spinning wheel and makes carpets and fabrics. All these works require constant movement from place to place and this would not be possible if the woman wore her veil, which descends from the crown to the hem of the dress and interfering with walking. Therefore, we see that in the villages an Afghan woman walks bareheaded, in a shirt with short sleeves and an open neck. When an Afghan peasant woman is not at work, she closes only at the sight of a stranger. But the Afghan woman has no right to communicate with other people's men even in the village: this is considered indecent. At home in the family, men and women dine together, but if an outsider is present, the women eat separately. They rarely appear in a room where a stranger is sitting, but their absence in such cases is not so necessary! as, for example, among the Armenians or among the Persians. It is also a woman's responsibility to supply the economy with water. If the source is near a village, this is not a big deal. But often the source is several! miles from housing, and then women have to go every two or three days at dawn for water. which they collect in leather furs and transport on donkeys. Women are not exempt from this duty even when the way to get water is difficult and fraught with some dangers. For example, in one of the eastern regions of Afghanistan, in Zeybak, located at an altitude of 9.250 feet, the water in rivers and streams freezes in winter and women bring water from afar, from places where there are spring springs. Here are excerpts from an Afghan song describing the area. “Nowhere are there such snows and winds as in Zeybak in winter, there is no such cold in any place under the sky. Wherever you look, you cannot find any traces here: you cannot see the earth from the abundance of ice and snow. Winter continues in others for three or four months the edges, it stretches for eight months in these places. In an earthen oven they burn only a damp thorn and thaw, and that's all! Who will not go blind and watery from the smoke? Their wives go a whole mile to fetch water. Woe to the top woman who stumbles in her gait. If anyone gets sick, there are no medicines or doctors. Shave someone's head - and then there is no barber. " her sister went to a peasant farm. The nomad works even more, while her husband cares very little about the household. She dismantles and assembles the yurts that serve as their dwelling during stops. Oops, no worse than a man, he loads animals and it is easier than him to carry weights. Moving from one place to another, women not only carry children and all belongings, but in addition they lead pack animals; and the husband walks alongside, burdened only with his gun, with which he does not part. But the Afghan nomad does not know "cha-fool" at all. In constant transitions in the fresh air, spending time in hard physical labor, she is well developed physically, healthy and beautiful.In the handicraft industry, the Afghan woman is mainly engaged in the manufacture of woolen blankets, carpets and fabrics. Cashmere is weaved, a very soggy fabric made of wool of sheep and goats, shawls "lyunga", etc. In this case, women usually prepare yarn and warp, and men weave. Felt rugs are made by women in a special way. The wool is moistened, then it is mixed and crumpled by hand until a dense mass is obtained. This mass is shaped and dimensioned as required and dried. When finished, these) carpets are 3 / 2-1 "thick; they are gray or black, or painted brown with pale flower ornaments. The Afghan woman is also the keeper of traditional medicine traditions. The woman provides first aid to the wounded and disabled, and for these cases, the Afghan women have developed certain methods of treatment. The Afghan woman quite deftly sews up wounds with an ordinary sewing needle, using her own hair instead of threads. "Fig. 3. An Afghan woman for threshing. In the absence of hospitals, medical specialists, any kind of medical care and a low level of culture, one can imagine hygienic conditions in which Afghans live. In poor houses where it is crowded, women live terribly crowded, 8-10 people in a small room. Bedspreads, wide trousers and shirts with their numerous folds are a fertile surface for the accumulation of dirt and dust. never wash. When an Afghan woman is about to become a mother, different slander begins to have a boy. Childbirth takes place in the same musty female half. Afghan nomads in this regard are even worse. If childbirth occurs on the way, the caravan, of course, from "Doesn't stop for that. Usually, the day after giving birth, she has to follow the caravan with the baby in her arms, as if nothing had happened." I can not say that this leads to female illnesses, which often end tragically for the mother, despite the fact that nomads, as we have seen, are very strong physically and tempered in constant transitions. So, we drew the life circle of a woman in pre-reform Afghanistan. ' We tried to highlight what is inherent in all tribes and all nationalities inhabiting Afghanistan, or most of them, and to identify the position of women in certain classes, certain production groups. There are, of course, deviations in both directions. In some tribes, for example, we see that the woman enjoys more freedom. So, among the Hezarians, the wife receives guests in the absence of her husband, and if the husband, returning home, sees that other people's shoes are at the yurt, he leaves so as not to interfere with the conversation between his wife and the guest. About kafirs in Afghanistan they say that they sell their wives for one night. But this is obviously slander caused by the freer position of the kafirka. As a general rule, deviations in custom depend on the influence of neighboring countries; in the west, the influence of Persia is stronger, in the east - the influence of India, and in the north - the influence of our Uzbeks and Kirghiz. It is interesting to note that the position of women before the start of reforms gradually deteriorated. At the beginning of the last century, according to the then travelers, Afghan women, in the absence of her husband, received guests like hostesses. These travelers celebrate their courtesy, modesty, and cheerful disposition. At present, such communication between Afghans and foreign men is out of the question. Here. obviously, the Persian influence and zealous Muslimization of the region played a role.

4. Afghan woman after reforms
The course taken by the young emir Amanullah Khan to reorganize the country, to cleanse it of feudal remnants, could not but affect the position of women. Having ascended the throne after the coup d'etat and the death of his father, he first of all dismissed the wives from his father's harem, allowing them to to arrange their future life. The emir himself has one wife, so by personal example he campaigns for monogamy, in addition, he conducts propaganda against polygamy through his administration. A practical measure in the field of regulating marriage relations was the law on the size of the bride price. A certain amount has been established, more than which the bride's parents cannot be paid. This (• was done in order to weaken the profitability of the sale of daughters and sisters, and, thus, this law strikes at the most shameful phenomenon in the life of an Afghan woman - her buying and selling. This law also aims to facilitate marriage for the poor classes of the population and is aimed against unnecessary expenses for weddings and funerals, sometimes undermining the well-being of entire households. It should be noted, however, that this law is often secretly circumvented. This event bears clear traces of our legislation. As you know, in the eastern republics of the Soviet Union ransom brides, "kalym", is strictly prosecuted by the law. Another very important legislative measure is the abolition of slavery. Slavery was officially abolished under Abdur-Rahman, at the end of the last century. But this law remained only on paper. In fact, slavery and, therefore, the slave trade continued to flourish, and in 1921 the emir issued the following order, which, we quote in full, as he gives common features of everyday life in relation to slavery and the position of slaves. Here is the order: “It is regrettable that some glorious and respectable persons own slaves and slaves, although, according to the orders of the Most Serene Sharia, the possession of the latter is not allowed. The peoples and tribes of Islam, which are free, cannot keep slaves and slaves in their homes. After this (order), persons who have fallen into a humiliated state of slavery, in the form of slaves and slaves, must be released without delay and without delay. If someone previously had cohabitation with a slave, from whom he had children, but until now, out of ignorance, did not conclude a marriage union (agreement) with her, according to the rules. Sharia law, must enter into marriage with her and issue her a marriage document, subject to agreement with the Sharia orders on the observance of her rights. If someone, under the guise of some kind of cunning, for example, under the name of a servant, or under the name of his child, wishes to detain a slave, then this is not allowed. He must unconditionally remove her from his house, giving her the right to go wherever she wants. If someone violates this order and will keep the slaves from the above (in the order) in his house by force, then a fine from 1,000 to 2,000 rupees per capita is collected from the owner of the house. After this order, the buying and selling of slaves of any tribe is prohibited. If someone starts buying and selling slaves, then wherever they are, they are declared free. ”From the content of the order it is clear what kind of tricks are used in Afghanistan to exploit slaves. It is clear that even now not all slaves have been released, that many still carry the slave yoke under the guise of servants or children. After all, liberation under the law, with the downtrodden and helplessness of a woman, with material insecurity, is not enough to actually free a slave. Where should she go when, apart from freedom, she has nothing for her soul? Nevertheless, formal release is a major step forward. A new criminal code was introduced, which was intended to supplement Muslim legislation and soften some of its provisions. This code abolishes torture and the husband's right to punish his wife. The new criminal code borrows a lot from the Turkish criminal code, since the emir generally tries to imitate Turkish models, as the most acceptable for the Muslim population of Afghanistan. Innovations taken out of a Muslim country do not irritate the faithful as much as imitation of European countries. Judicial practice, however, shows that under the new order, crimes are often punished in two ways: both under the Sharia and under the criminal code. In the field of education, a broad program of universal free 'compulsory education was outlined. First, the whole work of enlightenment was in the hands of the mullahs, who taught children only spiritual "sciences." Now the Ministry of Education has developed a curriculum, which includes both the exact and the humanities. However, the teaching of this program is still entrusted to the clergy, as there are no trained teachers at all. Rural schools often lack permanent teachers. Teachers wander from one village to another.To eliminate this deficiency, a teacher training school was opened; foreign teachers and instructors are invited; the most talented * of students were sent abroad to take courses in European educational institutions. In 1920, a girls' school for 20.0 female students was organized in Kabul, which is supposed to be expanded into a secondary school, and several other schools. According to the 1927 budget, 27 new schools for boys and 3 schools for girls are planned to be opened in Afghanistan. In 1923, a women's and children's hospital was opened in Kabul, the first and only hospital in all of Afghanistan. In 1926, a woman gynecologist recommended by the People's Commissar for Health was invited to Kabul from Moscow. Finally, in order to involve at least the Afghan court women in the achievements of women's emancipation (emancipation), the emir invited the famous activist of the Turkish women's movement Khurshid-bey-khanum as the court lady of his wife. Afghan women rarely appear in public places. Wrapped in their veils, they slowly move along the rows of the bazaar, stopping at individual shops to choose ribbons or other trinkets for themselves (household items and estimated supplies are bought by a husband or servants). When a male customer appears, they quickly move aside, disappearing into the crowd. On the last day of the great holiday of Ramadan, women gather in some garden, where they sing national songs and hang out. Only on this day can they take off the veil, but men are not allowed here. In 1921, a theater was built in Pagman, the summer residence of the emir, which is also accessible to women. Since women are not allowed to sit next to men in the theater, the boxes are so built that those who sit in it see the stage, but they cannot be seen from the audience. In 1924 a second theater was built, which also hosts film screenings. Here, on certain days, only women are allowed into the gallery, and thus women are guaranteed a visit to the theater and cinema. The repertoire is very poor, the artists are just learning to play under the guidance of a learned Indian - the director of the theater. The plays show the struggle between the new and the old, the benefits of enlightenment, etc. Cinema films, For lack of funds, old, and very often, undemanding Kabul viewers are shown pictures glued from random remnants of worn-out films. may seem very modest, in reality they are a big event in Afghanistan, this half-savage, backward country, where the influence of prejudices supported by mullahs, spiritual shepherds, is very great. Among the backward strata of the population, urged on by the mullahs, these innovations caused a storm of indignation. A wave of uprisings, riots and banditry directed against the new regime has spilled over the country. The insurgents' demands repeatedly pointed to the reforms concerning women as violating Islamic law. In 1923, a proclamation was issued with the following content: “Oh, Emir, why did you give up the honest Koran, why did you give a woman the right to live of her own free will? Where is the woman's honor and Sharia law left? ”And during the Khosta uprising in 1924-25. a demand was put forward to close the women's school, in which the students, in addition to the Koran, were taught the sciences of the infidels, that is, secular sciences: geography, mathematics, chemistry, etc. And so was the movement against women's emancipation that they had to give in. The women's school was temporarily closed. The new edition of the 1925 Criminal Code was published in amended form; some types of punishment were restored and, by the way, the husbands were again given the right to punish their wives. He began to carry out the plan of reforms that had been outlined more firmly. How much the old is still strong, can be seen from the following case. Charlotte Ghai from Berlin in 1921 married Abdullah Khan, an Afghan tobacco merchant who lived in Berlin. A few years later, they went to Kabul, where he joined the government service. After his death, she not only could not take possession of the property of her husband, from whom she had children, but, as it turned out, according to the laws of the Afrid tribe. she herself became the property of the tribe. In view of her refusal to marry her husband's brother, the opa was sent to the bazaar to be sold as a slave. The German representative in Afghanistan, who was involved in the case, freed her, paying the highest price charged for her. The Afghan government then stated that all this took place on the territory of independent tribes, not subordinate to the Afghan government. However, this fact testifies to the rights that are still preserved in many places, such as the situation of the Afghan woman in modern Afghanistan. As you can see, in this recent dark kingdom, the first glimpses of the emancipation of a woman are already outlined. But the swift and stubborn movement of the whole country towards progress and the example that stands in front of it at its northern border, the example of our Union, is a guarantee that here too soon the future will change.