I. Modern Turkey
a) Territory, population, main occupation of residents
The Republic of Turkey occupies a small part of the territory in Europe, namely the southern tip of the Balkan Peninsula, the so-called. Thrace, and located on the peninsula of Asia Minor - Anatolia. Anatolia is also adjoined by those that are part of Turkey: from the southwest - Cilicia, from the east - Turkish Armenia and the southeast - Kurdistan. Thus, Turkey borders on the Transcaucasian Republics and is separated by the Black Sea from Crimea and southern Ukraine. On the 'Balkan Peninsula, Turkey borders on Bulgaria and Greece. In M, Asia: in the south, with Syria and Iraq (Arab states, the first under the French mandate, the second under the English, almost colonies), and in the east, Turkey, except for the Transcaucasian Republics, borders with Persia. The population of Turkey, in the absence of accurate statistics, it is determined, approximately, from 9 to 1 million people. The main mass is made up of Turks - from 7 to 9 million, then Kurds - about half a million, migrants from the Caucasus (Circassians, Chechens, Lezgins, etc.) - 300 thousand Turkmens - 400 thousand, followed by small ethnic groups , which, like the above, are national minorities: Arabs, Ansars, Lazes, Greeks, Armenians, Jews, Gypsies, Bulgarians, etc. The life and economic situation of the peoples inhabiting Turkey are very diverse and in many respects differ from the life of the Turks themselves. However, the real work has in mind exclusively a Turkish woman. Turkey occupies a huge space - but not all of the land is suitable for human life. The surface of Turkey is very diverse. Its European part - Thrace - is crossed by a low mountain ridge running parallel to the Black Sea coast. The population here is engaged in agriculture, tobacco growing, and other trades. A significant part of Anatolia is occupied by mountains and plateaus. The most suitable for life is the coastal strip of the Black, Aegean and Mediterranean seas. Due to the characteristic location of the mountains, the paths built here by foreigners go to the west-east. direction. The country thus forms a natural bridge between the Balkan Peninsula and Asia and has served as an arena for trade and military activities of various peoples since ancient times. The coastal strip, by nature, has much more in common with southern Europe than with Asia. The inner part of the country, on the contrary, on the surface, the climate can be ranked among the western extremities of the mountain and steppe areas of Central Asia. This area, with a large number of lakes, is the most barren part of the central plateau, cut by rivers heading north-west. The inhabitants of this part are engaged in cattle breeding and agriculture. With the exception of the described central region, Anatolia is a fertile area. The western and southern parts are especially rich, where horticulture, silkworm breeding and tobacco growing are flourishing. The main occupation of the Turkish population is agriculture, cattle breeding and tobacco growing. The industry is poorly developed, there are few large cities. An ordinary Turkish city, in Anatolia, has a very colorful appearance; narrow, winding streets lined with flat houses decorated with galleries and balconies. Craftsmen always sit in front of the house with their worker! device. The city center is a market square, always busy with carts, carts, donkeys. Bazaars usually take place on holidays. Everything is sold at the bazaar: millet, sheep's cheese, etc. In the motley hustle and bustle, the tents of nomads who have wandered to the city flicker, and the city is filled with the roar of donkeys and the songs of blind zurnacs. Children are scurrying right there. They carefully collect fresh manure and put it in specially prepared bags. Wood in central Anatolia is expensive and hard to come by, and dried manure is a good fuel. Every town has coffee shops and saunas. The former serve as a traditional resting place for men. Here, in the shade, they often sleep with their heads always resting on the saddle. Baths - entertainment for women; here they spend the whole day, here they drink, eat and gossip with friends. Most cities abound in water and greenery. As a rule, sharp peaks of mosque minarets rise above each city. The Turkish village has a very poor appearance, although the inside of the houses is kept as clean as it is | the poverty of the owners allows. Usually in the middle of the village rises the house of a bey (rich man), which is adjacent to low clay houses and dugouts. Gardens and fields surround the villages. The cultivation of the land for most of the peasants in Anatolia is extremely primitive: they plow the land with a wooden plow, which is harnessed to bulls. The Turkish peasant is very hardy and loving. When the roads are in BAD CONDITION, he has to expend extraordinary efforts to sell his products and exchange them for urban manufactures. On all roads one can see narrow carts drawn by oxen or bulls, the so-called carts; next to them, clumsy carts, set on one axle, with two round scraps of wood weave with a creak and noise. 1. Field work in Anatolia instead of wheels. Long caravans are visible on the other side. In charge of! caravan is a donkey. Sits on his back. "Katyrdzhi" - the leader of the caravan The donkey, the chain, is followed by the camels with their load. the latter has several bells on the neck: their uniform tinkling shows the guide that all animals are walking calmly and in order. Travelers often ride camels. From time to time someone drags on a folk song, others echo him ... Lately, the camel and the caravan are beginning to replace the car and the train of the railway, but it will take a long time for Turkey to have a sufficient railway network! M. Asia (Anatolia) still has the blood of their ancestors - the nomadic Turks who migrated here in the 13th century. from Central Asia; but the appearance of the modern Turk, under the influence of mixing with the indigenous population, has changed a lot. However, along with this, the spiritual characteristics of the race did not disappear; the endurance, calm courage and unpretentiousness of the shepherd people did not disappear either. The centuries-old sultan's period, of course, did not improve the situation of the struggle. All the sultan's institutions did not correspond to the spirit of the people, did not meet their needs, as did the entire regime of the sultan. Despite its natural resources, Turkey remained a poor agricultural country, constantly ravaged by wars in which defeat Due to its favorable geographical position, Turkey has always been a bone of contention between the strongest European states, each of which wanted to have the Straits of Constantinople in their hands. As a result of these objective historical conditions, which affected the entire economic structure of Turkey, it was not able to develop economically into a large industrial nation state. Western capitalism used Turkey as a market for selling its goods. Suppressing the development of national industry here, European capital contributed, thereby, to the preservation of the feudal-patriarchal system here, and together with it, it contributed to the preservation of the most disenfranchised position of Turkish women. Only when industrial capital appears to replace commercial capital and Eastern despotism, when the national Turkish intelligentsia and the bourgeoisie achieve, through the revolution of 1908, the constitutional transformation of the state, then does the women's movement begin to develop here. It was purely intellectual and populist. It sought partial freedoms for women: the right to education, family emancipation and the removal of the veil from the face.
b) National liberation struggle. Defeat of the Turkish Ottoman Empire in the World War 1914-1918. meant the death of her | as an independent state, the actual division of vast territories between the victors: England, France and Italy. The Turkish sultan, in order to maintain at least a shadow of his power, made all concessions to the winners and signed with them, in the city of Sevres, in 1920 an onerous peace treaty. But the calculation was made without the real master of the country, without the laboring masses of Turkey, devastated, impoverished, but still showing strength and perseverance in the struggle for self-preservation. While the British, French, Italian occupying troops went deep into the best the regions of Turkey, its capital Constantinople and the straits were captured by the enemy, the Greek army dyed the waters of the Smyrna port with Turkish blood, occupied the large city of Asian Turkey, Smyrna, and invaded the interior of the country, consuming the Turkish villages and cities to fire and sword. continuous advance into the country, it was difficult to determine the limits of the despair of the Turkish people. And now, the tired, naked people rose up. He rebelled without leaders and at first without any plan of the Turk. In many places, organizations began to be created for the armed defense of their rights. These detachments attack the occupiers, upsetting their rear, raising uprisings, destroying communications and food. By the beginning of 1919, all the peasantry had risen, led by demobilized soldiers. Such a spontaneous upsurge is explained not only by the moments of military-political oppression, but also by the economic need of the peasantry to liberate the coastal strip occupied by the enemy and, mainly, ports, for the implementation and production of the internal exchange of grain and raw materials accumulated during the years of the world war and the blockade. The action of the peasant masses turns into a broad national movement with the addition of the urban bourgeoisie, which has grown greatly during the war years, the intelligentsia, and, finally, military elements led by Kemal Pasha, the leader of the national movement, now the President of the Republic of Turkey. By the will of the population, the first national assembly was convened in the city of Erz-room, at which it was decided to defend their rights. From that moment on, the liberation and revolutionary struggle of the Turkish people for its existence took the form of a war, which had to be waged by the people's government of the Great National Assembly formed in Angora against Western imperialism. Subsequently, at the congresses in Sivas, and then in Angora, On April 23, 1920, this decision was repeated and confirmed. Final British occupation Constantinople in March 1920, the dispersal of the Turkish parliament helps to formalize the state building of the new Turkey and make it the natural center of Angora, located, unlike Constantinople, in the center of Anatolia. Of course, for the Sultan of Anatolia (Asian Turkey) was a country of treason, ... rebelled against the padishah (sultan). The Sultan's court sentenced Mustafa Kemal and other major leaders of the national movement to death in absentia. The spontaneous submission of the masses, which initially took the form of a partisan war, was used by the leaders of the struggle to create a staunch people's army. After 4 years of heroic struggle, this army won decisive victories over Greece, Dashnak Armenia and France (in Cilicia). And when it seized the country in a revolutionary manner and approached Constantinople, on a dark autumn night in 1922, the last fled from the Ildiz palace to the English dreadnought Sultan of Turkey Memed VI, deposed by the Grand National Assembly of Turkey for treason and betrayal of the nation on 1 / X 1922. And finally, on March 3, 1924, by the decision of the same VNST, the last caliph (spiritual head of all Muslims) Abdul Majid was deposed, and on March 5 he left Turkey forever, taking with him all the memories of the former power and power of the Ottoman sultans and caliphs. The caliphs used their religious authority to promote the ideas of militant pan-Islamism among Muslims around the world. They have always been the center uniting all the reactionary elements of Islam (the clergy, the pan-Islamic (bourgeoisie, etc.). They contributed to the involvement of the countries of the East in the orbit of imperialism. After the World War, the Turkish caliphs openly sided with the imperialists and all contributed to their policy of enslaving Turkey and the defeat of the national revolutionary movement of its people. Naturally, the victorious people tried to get rid of them. There is no doubt that the example of the struggle of Soviet Russia against the intervention of Western imperialism had a tremendous impact on the development of the national liberation movement. The Soviet government was the first to recognize the new Turkish government. the state and entered into a close community with it in May 1920. Friendly relations were secured by a number of agreements on friendship and brotherhood of peoples. {By 1923, young Turkey successfully ended the war for its liberation. At an international conference in Lausanne, she concluded a victorious peace with the imperialists (24 / UP 1923), having invaded their territory and created political, eco-Unomic and legal conditions for their self-sustained existence. The leaders of the national movement are striving to create a bourgeois-democratic state in Turkey. The republican form of government was established on October 29, 1923, the current constitution was adopted by the VNST on April 20, 1924.

2. The life of a Turkish woman
a) Old life
The life of the Turks has developed under the strong influence of their religion - Islam. Most of the country's rulers drew all their worldly wisdom from the Koran (the holy book of Muslims). The Koran is a system of property and family law that meets the relationships based on private property that existed in the economy, trade and life of the peoples who inhabited Arabia during the era of the founder of Islam (VII century). And now the Turkish sultans, encouraged by the clergy, saw in the Koran, which is perfect in its spirit and according to its standards! did not correspond to the economic state of Turkey in the 19th and 20th centuries, the source of wisdom and all knowledge. All legislation was based on the Koran; in old schools only the Koran was studied. Thanks to this situation, the Turks did not develop, but artificially decreased their interest in learning, and only the lucky ones who got into foreign educational institutions or went abroad got rid of such a system of education. According to Sharia and adat, i.e. according to religious and customary law, which most of all reflect the economic backwardness of the East, they are used to looking at a woman as a lower being, as a thing. This view was especially instilled in the clergy, who were the most reactionary elements in the country. Usually, at the age of 9-15, a girl was married, or rather, sold for kalym (ransom), and since then! she had to walk with a closed face, since, according to the established centuries-old custom, a woman was among the Turks, like among most peoples of the East, a real hermit. Obliged to serve only the man to whom she became a wife or concubine, a Turkish woman did not dare to appear to another man, did not dare to look up at him. Islam allows the faithful to have 4 wives, but besides these, you can have an unlimited number of slave concubines. However, polygamy (polygamy) has always existed only among the upper class: the Pasha, the clergy and the rich bourgeoisie. The Pasha dignitary was officially considered a monogamist, but he had unofficial wives - "odalyk". As soon as the "odalyk" gives birth to a child, she, according to the Sharia, becomes a wife, and thus the Pasha from a monogamous turned into a polygamist. To contain a large number of "odalyk" and wives were available only to the rich therefore, there were several dozen large harems throughout Turkey. The largest was the harem of the Sultan, numbering more than a thousand women. The working population, of course, could not afford such a "luxury" of polygamy, for purely economic reasons. Polygamy among the peasants was found only where the handicraft of women was; such as: the manufacture of carpets, fabrics, sericulture, all kinds of weaving - occupied a prominent place. In manual labor, each extra hand brings material benefits, and each handicraftsman acquired two or three wives in order to have free workers. With the decline of handicraft production, this group also experienced a transition to monogamy. The intelligentsia did not have polygamy, and it was a champion of women's equality. This is mainly due to the economic situation of the Turkish intelligentsia, which literally eked out a semi-proletarian existence. Usually a Turkish house - simple, with high windows - is divided into two halves: a male - "selamlik" and a female - "haremlik", which may include of the men, only one husband. Here, among the low divans, set along the walls, hung with carpets, among pillows, tables and trinkets, a Turkish woman from the wealthy class spent her life. A peasant woman huddles in a smoky hut or dugout, next to livestock, works from morning till night on her farm, but she also has her own harem behind the board partition, where a stranger is also forbidden to enter. The inhabitants of Turkish rich harems belonged to the most diverse nations. In addition to Turkish women, there were Arabian, Circassian, Armenian, Persian, Tatar, French and other women. The Turkish woman went to the harem by marriage, the rest were sold by their parents, relatives or traders in human goods. The destruction of slavery gave rise to a special kind of entrepreneurs who bought up girls for Turkey at East and Russia. Especially) the purchase of women in lean years was successful. In the southern provinces of Russia, there were constant agents for the recruitment of harem goods and a rate was set on it, changing "depending on beauty and age. Thus, European women also fell into the harems. The usual home costume of a Turkish woman in Anatolia is wide, bright colors, shalwar, shoes , on top of a salwar, a long dress with slits on the sides, intercepted by a colored belt. But for a long time, under the influence of Western fashion, this costume from a city woman was supplanted by a European one. The guardians of women's morals only managed to keep the “feridge” - a dark cloak and an impenetrable veil “jasper ", Without which women, until the very last years, could not show themselves outside the house, and even now, in more remote areas, they do not risk going out. True, under the influence of fashion, the deaf baggy" feridge "has long turned into a light raincoat, and impenetrable "yashmak" - in a transparent veil through which you can see the facial features, but even in this form, this costume has already outlived itself. started to reform women's dress. Legislative acts of local city governments prohibit wearing veils, and in some vilayets (provinces) even decrees have been issued to replace, at a certain time, the traditional shalwar with a skirt. Until very recently, until 1925, the harem existed not only in the house Turk — he was in every public place: at the train station, in the train and tram carriages, at the dock of the steamer — everywhere there were special sections for women, where men were not allowed.

b) Childhood
The birth of a child is, along with marriage, the main celebration of the Turkish family. The birth of a child is accompanied by ancient rituals inherited from nomadic ancestors. As soon as the neighbors learn about the birth, they rush to look at the newborn, who has already been prepared for this visit: they cover him with good cloth, put an amulet with a saying from the Koran around his neck and tie a piece of garlic , The amulet and garlic should protect the baby from the envious eye. In order to drive away the genie from the child (the devil, which, according to legend, always turns in a newborn's room), a stick with a tied onion is placed in the corner of the room. 2. Turkish peasant family near their dugout house All those who bring congratulations are invited to the feast. However, it should be noted that only the birth of a boy is celebrated, while the birth of a girl goes unnoticed. In Turkey, as in the East in general, it is not customary to inquire about the number of female children. If a Turk says that he has four children, then he has four sons.1 72 Turkish woman. A Turkish woman breastfeeds herself - this is the custom and command of the Koran; only illness can force a mother to take a wet nurse. Then many of the rights of mothers are transferred to the latter; dairy relationship among the Turks is revered no less blood. Girls spend in the "haremlik" (harem) all their lives until marriage, boys - up to seven years. Needless to say, how much the harem spoils children. Rough morals, gossip, squabbles and fights — the usual companions of a harem — early reveal the inside out of life in front of a child. Father rarely pays attention raising children; Boys, due to the fact that they leave the harem early, gain life experience, but the girls vegetate to the end in stuffy dungeons, fenced off from the world, and leave them only to get into a new cage - into the harem of their husband. In terms of education, girls were also in a worse position. They were almost never sent to schools, and most women in provincial cities, as well as peasant women, were illiterate. Usually matchmaking took place, and even now in many places it happens, in the following order: in a house where there is an adult girl, a matchmaker or a young man's mother comes to look at the bride. The guest showers the bride with compliments and goes to the next houses to look at other brides. The next day she returns to the one on which her choice stopped, with a formal offer and a promise of a certain amount, in the form of a dowry. Because of. the dowry is intensified negotiations; everyone's goal is to have a brilliant wedding. Often, the family goes into debt to buy things the bride needs at weddings — to hire musicians and other expenses. But then everyone proudly recalls the magnificent wedding. And the girl gets to the person often not only alien to her, but quarrelsome and cruel. She must obediently satisfy his slightest whims, entangled in chains of religious laws, eternally intimidated by the reactionary clergy, and, most importantly, economically dependent on her husband. True, this dependence is incomplete and the Muslim woman still enjoyed, according to religious laws, certain rights to the separate use of family property; but the husband always had sufficient means and opportunities to keep his wife in the position of a subordinate, and not an equal member of the family.
c) Wedding, divorce
A wedding for a Turkish woman, not only a bride, but also a neighbor, a relative and a friend is a joy and great fun. On wedding days, women forget their monotonous work life and freely and sincerely indulge in fun. The motley ethnographic composition of the population of Turkey, the variety of living conditions of the Turks ( from nomadism to sedentary) - all this leaves an abundance of imprints on the wedding: rituals are preserved in the wedding, in which the most ancient forms of marriage, the pre-Muslim way of life are allegorically recalled - "abduction", "purchase and sale", although among the nomads of Turkey, " yuryukov ”, these customs have survived to this day. Traces of the forced abduction of girls are scattered throughout the wedding ceremony. The bride's side seems to know that a kidnapping is being prepared: on the day the bride moves to the groom's house, she is carefully guarded; the younger brother locks the room where the bride is sitting, and only for money does he open the door. Marriage is preceded, as indicated, by matchmaking, and after it is the ceremony of concluding a marriage contract, which takes place in the bride's house. Two specially selected witnesses ask the bride about her voluntary consent to the marriage. After that, the parties begin negotiations on the ransom, the bargaining ends in prayer, and the religious marriage is concluded. Then the groom's father starts a conversation with the bride's father about the time of the wedding. Before the appointed day, the “hena rite” takes place in the bride's house. 20-30 girls gather, and the elderly come. The bride's hair is loosened and combed, the hyena is bred in a cup, and to the accompaniment of songs, the hyuna's hair is dyed first for the bride, and then all the girls present. At this time, the bride's relatives cry. At the end of the ceremony, everyone present is having fun. Next comes the transfer of the groom's dowry to the bride's house. In the groom's house at this time everything is being prepared for the wedding. Musicians are invited to the wedding; wedding celebrations, which take place according to the established order, often drag on for a whole week. On Monday, the dowry is examined at the bride's house. On Tuesday, the priesthoods shout in the surrounding villages and even in the neighboring town that a wedding is taking place in such and such a village, and everyone is invited to the races with prizes. On Wednesday races are organized, in which the surrounding residents also take part. Runners, as a rule, take off their clothes and remain in their underwear. And in this form they walk an hour's walk from the village, from where the run begins. The winners receive prizes and gifts. The rest of the day, guests spend in contemplation of the "bacha" dances, which are interspersed with the performance of magicians. On the same day, clothes specially made for the groom are solemnly transferred from the bride's house to the groom. On Thursday, there is a fight of "pahlavans" (wrestlers). By the way, we note that in cities they do without struggle. The surrounding residents are also notified about the fight in advance. Pahlavans are being prepared in two weeks. On the day of the duel, again people, music. The fight begins with the youngest and gradually it comes to the "celebrities". Three winners receive prizes: a buffalo, a bull and a ram. At 10 o'clock, a procession, consisting of a muhtar, elders and always schoolchildren, approaches the bride's house. A white scarf is thrown over the bride, put on a horse and after parting with her parents, during which the bride is obliged to cry, a procession with bodies Egami, loaded with the bride's things, goes to the groom's house. Some boy from the groom's relatives is chosen as a "friend", he relentlessly walks with the groom. On the eve of the wedding night, the "friend" is rolled on the bed so that the young have a boy, and when the groom enters the bride's room, the "friend" is already there. Boiled chicken is brought here; the groom pulls one leg, the friend pulls the other. As soon as the “friend” rips off his leg, he immediately gets up and leaves. Near the room where the young people sleep, the groom’s relatives are on duty all night — in case the enemies want to harm the groom in any way, which can be expected from a rival. A few days later, the young go to the guests, starting with the father-in-law, and receive guests. The divorce among the Turks, until the new civil code of 1926, was not framed with any formalities and depended solely on the wishes of the husband. from me, ”or—“ I look at you as my sister’s back, ”so that an essential part of the divorce is over. The wife was considered released and had to return to her parents. Only the obligation to pay the divorced wife "mekr" (our alimony), the monthly amount for the maintenance of the children, if they were not left with the father, was a little restraining for the husband. In addition, the husband is obliged to return part of the dowry to his wife.
3. Women's movement in pre-revolutionary Turkey
The despotic regime of the sultans, the concentration in the hands of the clergy of supervision and guidance of almost all aspects of the life of the people (education, court, social and family life, etc.) not only interfered with the economic development of the people, but also led to the fact that the Turkish intelligentsia was in a semi-pro-tarized state. This: the situation helped to revolutionize the advanced strata of Turkish society. Undoubtedly, the city woman fully reflected the situation and all the moods and desires of the intelligentsia and the emerging bourgeoisie, and along with them, the Turkish woman speaks out with the demands of the struggle for emancipation and thus she participates in the general Turkish revolutionary movement. History of Turkey notes many attempts by individual women, to get out of their oppressed position, but the social conditions of the old regime did not favor the development of the women's movement that arose at the end of the 19th century. As noted, the women's movement began with a campaign against traditional clothing. Gradually, a European novel got into the harem for a fashion magazine. After him, Ekrem Bey's original play "Afiv-Angzhe-lik" (the birth of Angelica), dedicated to a woman, appears on the Turkish stage. It was a hot protest against the lack of rights of the Turkish woman. After her, poems and verses appear in literature, describing the corrupting atmosphere of harem life. Finally, a magazine is organized in Constantinople, around which the champions of women's liberation are united. They are waging a stubborn struggle against a tendentious view of women, against female trafficking, and they reveal the harm of polygamy. They proclaim the woman's right to motherhood, the right to freely choose her husband, and the right to love. Women's schools are opening in large cities. This first period of the women's movement was purely cultural in nature. Among the huge mass of small Turkish artisans and handicraftsmen-peasants, another process was taking place at that time, which, perhaps, more strongly than the organized movement of the urban woman reflected on the woman of the working class. The increasing cost of living, exhausting taxes and, most importantly, the competition between the cheaper foreign commodity of large-scale production and small-scale handicraft production, made the hard labor of women in many branches of the indigenous industry completely unprofitable. This circumstance led to a significant restriction of polygamy among the listed groups of workers and thereby unwittingly contributed to the 'improvement of the lot of the Turkish female worker. The struggle of the Old Turks with the Europeanized Young Turks that took place in this period was not reflected at all in the pages of the women's press. Despite this, on pioneers of the women's movement, brutal persecutions soon followed by the most reactionary sultan "bloody" Abdul-Hamid, who reigned in 1876. The magazine was closed, some writers were arrested, exiled, strangled, others fled abroad. A turning point has come in the development of the women's movement. If before the cause of women's lack of rights was seen in social prejudices and the cultural revival of society was exposed against them, now, after the death of the first undertakings, it became clear that first it was necessary to throw off the political shackles that prevented the people from living and breathing. The woman realized that the first and closest enemy on her way to liberation was the Sultan's regime with all its economic and political system. Executions, exile, wars tore away hundreds and thousands of sons and husbands from mothers and wives. And the woman accumulates a dull indignation against the brutal government. The restoration of the constitution in 1909 and the overthrow of the bloody Abdul-Hamid made it possible to once again expand the women's movement, but now, along with the idea of ​​emancipation, the idea of ​​a struggle to improve the economic situation of women was carried out. Since that time, many women have taken part in the revolutionary movement, which took place under the Young Turk banner and led by the "Unity and Progress" organization, which had its own women's committee. Women helped as much as they could. The traditional sanctity of the harem has been a reliable defense for revolutionary enterprises. Here, revolutionary correspondence and literature were hidden from government spies. Women copied and transported the literature of revolutionary leaders. The extraordinary nationality that swept the whole country in connection with the political upheaval of 1908-1909 affected the Turkish woman, who participates in freedom manifestations with an open face. At the first women's rallies, it was decided to abolish the custom of covering up faces and seeking full equality. But in Anatolia, where the bulk of the inhabitants are peasants, the women's movement was very weak. Here prejudices, traditions and the authority of the clergy were still strong. Ignorance and superstition still reigned here, but this time too, the women's movement was unlucky. The Young Turkish government (1909-1918) suppressed any initiative of the women's unions and ordered the police to "vigilantly monitor the observance of Turkish women 'national new customs and prescriptions of religion ”. This proves that the liberation aspirations of Turkish women were strongly at odds with the views of the ruling party, as well as the fact that the leaders of the renewed Turkey, the Young Turks, these glorified Europeans, still held on or were forced to adhere to the traditions of pre-reform Islam.

4. Turkish woman in the struggle for independence
The position of women completely changes with the onset of the world war. At this time, women's organizations of the patriotic direction organize assistance to the front, open soldiers' canteens, hospitals, etc., The unsuccessful war and the subsequent occupation of Turkey, cause wide participation of women already in political (events since 1918 .A city and village woman of Anatolia takes part in the national revolutionary movement. A number of women like Aishe-Khanum and others serve in the army and receive military distinctions. An urban woman goes to serve in the newly organized institutions and hospitals. A peasant woman (goes to military factories, she works in close proximity to the front, digs trenches, in her hands almost all the pack transport, finally, the young woman is responsible for delivering cartridges, shells and food to the battle line. (The woman's quick penetration into production and service in various government agencies broke all the conventions and barriers that separated a woman from equal work with a man. This has resulted in a series of women's equality activities undertaken by the government of the new Turkey.13 First of all, universal compulsory education was introduced in primary schools, where girls should be brought up with boys. Finally, the woman got free access to high school. Special preparatory courses for women have been established at the faculties of the University of Constantinople. At first, women were denied access to the faculties of law and medicine, but then this prohibition was lifted. Already in 1920 in Sivas, a teacher Makbule created a women's league and there were up to 15 societies pursuing charitable, cultural and political goals; they provide assistance to the unemployed, open special schools, workshops, support handicrafts that were revived during the war. First of all, a woman won a place among teachers. For some 5-6 years in Turkey, there are several hundred teachers who unite in special societies. By 1924, a union of women's equality was organized (from the women's section of the Committee for the Defense of Rights and the Women's People's Party), numbering hundreds of women. The union develops its activities mainly in. the area of ​​improving the life and position of urban women Thus, a special society was organized to combat prostitution and others. However, it should be noted that this union and others like it, created in Anatolia, consisting mainly of representatives of the Turkish bourgeoisie and groups adjacent to it, directed all their activities only to towards the achievement of cultural goals. The narrow class character of all these women's organizations did not allow them to openly fight for the political rights of women, to fight for her liberation from the religious and legislative fetters and outdated traditions that still hold in their tenacious hands the bulk of Turkish women - Turkish peasant women. Therefore, the women's union threw out political articles from the charter and limited itself to work on the mental development of women and the upbringing of the younger generation, but the union's charter was never approved by the government. The union organized meetings of members, at which resolutions of a principled nature on family laws were discussed and adopted. The demands of women boiled down to the following: the abolition of polygamy, the establishment of the institution of marriage on a cultural basis, the limitation of divorce, the establishment of a girl's marriageable age at 17, the obligation of spouses to exchange medical certificates of health before marriage. These demands were supported and proclaimed by the leaders of the women's movement, writers - Nesi-Khem-Mukhedin, Khalp-de-Khanum, Khalide-Edib, etc. It is interesting to note that in 1924 the VIST commission on religious affairs, which right, she did not dare to abolish polygamy in her draft law, adding only that a wife is recognized as having the right to demand that her husband not take a second wife. The spouse who agreed to this enters into the marriage contract about his refusal to have multiple wives. However, the government found it inconvenient to discuss this project in the Majlis, considering it incompatible with the spirit of the recent reforms. In view of this, the old decrepit family laws that did not correspond to the spirit of the time were left in force, and with them the custom of kidnapping brides, etc. Such a government policy indicates that the leaders of the Turkish national movement as a bourgeois movement, with all its characteristic features, having achieved success over the internal reaction, felt enough strength in themselves to refrain from the next necessary step on the path to emancipation. It finds no confirmation of the fact that, according to the 1924 constitution, a woman is deprived of all electoral rights. On this issue, the government turned out to be weaker than the oppositional elements headed by the clergy, under the onslaught of which it was forced to make concessions and refuse to involve women in the political life of the country. It is clear that this situation could not last long. The refusal to legalize the rights of women will undoubtedly revolutionize the Turkish woman, showing her the illusiveness of the successes she achieved without the main one! the right to equal participation in the political life of the country. At the same time, the basic principles of the People's Party include points that make it possible to conclude that the leaders of the national movement decided to pay the most serious attention to the position of the Turkish woman. For example, in the economic development of the country, the People's Party presents cooperation between a man and a woman as a truth that does not require proof. It goes without saying that both the entire program and the interpretation of the women's issue contains only general principles in the spirit of a bourgeois-democratic island, and no more. The leaders of the national movement, as well as the persons at the head of the women's movement, strenuously emphasize, that they are by no means advocates of accelerated emancipation. First of all, in their opinion, it is necessary to Europeanize the country, in general, to change its way of life, customs, legislation and even the appearance of every citizen. And, indeed, the Europeanization of the country began with clothes. Tailcoat and hat replaced the traditional costume and fez. And if the peasant woman of Anatolia still wears a "feridge" and a veil, then her sisters in Constantinople, Smyrna and other cities have thrown off their veils and are already wearing European dress. The beginning of the change in morals was laid by the introduction of new codes of criminal and especially civil, which fundamentally destroy the entire system of Islamic law. The adoption of these codes is of great importance for Turkey, because with their entry into force (1926), the legal relationship that was a remnant medieval feudalism. This was most clearly manifested in the legal status of a Turkish woman. Freed from the clutches of a harem life, a Turkish woman continued to remain in the atmosphere of the old family life associated with customary law — adat and Sharia. It was necessary to destroy the patriarchal structure of the family, imbued with the spirit of conservatism and religious prejudice. (This was successfully achieved by the introduction of a new civil code and a new law on marriage. They introduce a completely different beginning in the social structure and family law of the new Turkey. Turkish women now have the opportunity to build his family life on the basis of free choice and equality. 'The new law has made a revolution in marriage law in Turkey. Civil marriage has now been introduced to replace the existing religious marriage. The implementation of this new law has met with opposition from the population and passes through almost the entire country painlessly. and especially workers are very willing to register. The first such marriages, in the capital, were, as it were, indicative, were conducted in a tor-formerly and now feminine atmosphere, with speeches and speeches, the city administration. The new Civil Code establishes gender equality. Under the new law. , divorce can be received only through the courts. Thus, a Turkish woman receives the well-known protection of the law against the arbitrariness of her husband. Monogamy is finally established. Of course, in some places, especially in remote places, old customs and traditions still hold, considering the work of a woman shameful not only for her, but also for the family. Still partially retained its strength and tradition, according to which it is considered a special shame for a woman that she is unmarried (this custom has always put a woman in a particularly difficult position). These prejudices are still held mainly among the rest of the elements of the Turkish people, moreover, the wealthy strata have to be withdrawn to this part. The bulk of Turkish women, the entire intelligentsia and working people of Turkey are not fully prepared for the adoption of new legislation. The new civil code and the law on marriage are called upon to play a huge cultivating role in the family and social life of the country. On the ruins of the old sultan Turkey with harems and the slave position of women a new family, a new statehood is created. The new codes are the end of a long and stubborn struggle waged by the Turkish people for their liberation from the remnants of feudalism and the sultanate and caliphate that led it. The new civil code is a victory for the Turkish woman on the road to equality. Here we have a certain pressure on the ruling circles of Turkey, but this time from the Turkish working masses, the intelligentsia and even the bourgeoisie, which wants to live in a European way. However, in the new code, a certain concession is made to the old order. Namely, the abolition of polygamy has no retroactive effect. A Turk who at the time of the entry into force of the new code, i.e., by October 1, 1926, had several only wives have the right to continue to live in the old way.
5. The current situation of the peasant and working woman
Agriculture, cattle breeding and a fairly developed small-scale handicraft industry are of major importance in the economic life of Turkey, as noted above. All these economic conditions determine the economic, legal and living situation of the Turkish peasant woman. The life of a worker on a farm, manufacturing various household items, caring for livestock, working in the field, in gardens, on tobacco and poppy plantations (opium dressing), employed since dawn before sunset, that is the lot of the Turkish peasant woman. Poverty and destitution have long put her in the same position as a man, if necessary, for the latter, involuntarily remain deaf to the religious interpretations of the ulema and actually violate the seclusion of a woman. In addition to the household, the Turkish peasant woman in many regions is employed in the handicraft industry for the manufacture of various fabrics, carpets, embroidery and leather and wood artwork. In this work, and especially in the manufacture of carpets, a child-girl, who works 10-15 hours a day, without straightening her back, stands alongside the woman. Somehow nobody pays attention to this terrible exploitation of child labor. The Turkish handicraftsman does not work for himself, but for the owner-buyer, who is not limited by anyone or anything in his arbitrariness and in his exploitative appetites. As the handicraft peasant industry is displaced by the cheaper factories of the West, the peasant woman is forced to abandon the countryside and go to work in the city or as farm laborers, since agriculture alone, with a significant tax pressure, is becoming more and more difficult for a peasant family to live on. For the simple reason that a Turkish peasant woman is busy with work, she enjoys great freedom in everyday life, although the life of her family is still regulated by the remnants of the clan system. That is why the women's movement has always been limited only to the city. Most of the demands of urban women were alien to the countryside, while the peasant woman did not deal with political issues. The city woman showed no interest in her struggle for emancipation to the needs and demands of her country sister. This alienation of the urban woman from the peasant woman is one of the weak points of the Turkish women's movement. In Turkey today, when national liberal ideas have been implemented, the ruling groups are unable to hide the poverty of the peasantry and the exploitation of the working class. As we have seen, the activities of the women's union in Constantinople and similar organizations in Anatolia, following the path of the Western bourgeois movement, begin to emerge in bold relief. reduced to philanthropy. Having received some rights, the urban Turkish woman remains almost passive in the struggle for voting rights, for improving the conditions of women's work. Meanwhile, the developing industry in Turkey imperiously pulls women into the factory as day and seasonal workers. Female labor is used very heavily here. Thus, in Turkey, as elsewhere, during the years of war and devastation, a female proletariat is growing. More than ten thousand Turkish women are already employed in various branches of labor. There are no full-fledged trade unions in Turkey. The underground trade-union organizations, if they exist, are too weak to protect the interests of the workers, and are limited to the propaganda of general professional ideas and the professional education of the workers themselves. The lack of statistics in Turkey does not allow us to give detailed Figures that would paint a Turkish worker lives. Let's try to give a few numbers. For example, at carpet factories, usually adult weavers receive 25-30 piastres per working day, girls — 10-15 piastres — both on their grub. Legs curled up, a weaver sits in front of the loom on which they stretch her carpet, and weaves, without getting tired, without being distracted to the side, from dawn of morning to dawn of evening. For lunch, there is no hard drink; you are not supposed to go out of your own need without asking, therefore, you often do not run here. Of this earnings, uncontrollably ripped off by the employers for fines, female workers pay about 3-4 percent of various taxes. Turkish female workers take an active part in the struggle against entrepreneurs to improve working conditions. Thus, at the economic conference held in the city of Smyrna in 1922, four women workers of the Smirnov tobacco factory and one peasant sang the workers' delegations. The economic and political demands of the workers displayed there formed the basis for a number of measures in the field of labor legislation, completed the appearance in 1926 of the draft Labor Code. However, there are no achievements in relation to female labor. The working day for a woman, as well as for all workers, is set at 60 hours. a week, with a rest for 1 hour a day during work '. A restriction was adopted only for the work of adolescents who are employed at the age of at least 12 years, and for workers in mines who must be at least 18 years of age. Finally, the code seeks to regulate the relationship between workers and entrepreneurs. The new labor code applies only to the strictly regulated work of large enterprises; if it is carried out, work in handicraft establishments with engines of up to 5 horsepower or having no more than 10 workers is excluded; it also does not apply to agricultural work. But in modern Turkey, most of the workers are precisely in the small handicraft industry, where enterprises number no more than 10 workers or workers 'are families of handicraftsmen doing work at home. The Labor Code absolutely does not have any questions of tariffication of wages, basic' requirements on general labor protection, as well as issues of sick leave and insurance of workers. The rights of professional association, organization of mutual assistance are severely curtailed and are rather prohibitive. Strange as it may seem, it must be noted that, under the current conditions of their work, it is not the work of adolescents that is characteristic of enterprises that are subject to the CX dex, but the work of an adult woman, which is regarded equally cheaply with the work of a teenager. Teenagers, on the other hand, still make up the main frame of only small handicraft enterprises of the semi-domestic type, which just do not fit the new labor code. The labor of the worker is bypassed by the new code. Needless to say that the Turkish worker, who now fills weaving and paper mills, enterprises of the taste industry, fruit and drying factories, silk spinning mills and tobacco factories, who in general makes up 20% of the total number of workers. in extremely unfavorable conditions, both in terms of remuneration and in terms of labor protection at work. The communist movement in Turkey is also spreading among female Turkish workers. When the Turkish Communist Party was in existence; legally, she had fifteen female teachers, workers and one peasant in her ranks. A special women's magazine was published. At the present time, under the leadership of the Communist Party, a female worker is undergoing political studies and is participating in the struggle for equality. Despite the repressions against the most active representatives of the women's labor movement and even arrests, some of them, like the poet, handicraft and communist Yashar Ne Ziyye, arrested in 1925, is becoming very popular among the working class. Every year, a Turkish woman worker is more and more torn away from home and family, and thus a new type of Eastern proletarian is being developed, an ardent and courageous defender of her rights and the rights of workers. The very fact of the awakening of a Turkish woman, expressed in the fact that she begins to reach for knowledge, to seek to improve their position, takes part in a social movement, is drawn into the national revolutionary movement and even partly in the mainstream of the Communist Party - testifies first of all to the social and cultural underpinning of the country. A typical sign of the Turkish women's movement today is its the prevailing bourgeois-intellectual character. Unlike other, more developed countries of the East, there is still no real workers' movement for women, there is no female peasant movement, and even more so, no female communist movement. But it must be remembered that in the transitional period experienced by Turkey, in the period national-bourgeois revolution, the existing women's movement Nation and its organizations harbor a significant amount of revolutionary energy and are undoubtedly capable of supporting many of the demands of both the peasant population and all working people. It is only necessary to expand the work more widely. Due to these properties, the existing women's organizations (unions of equal rights, societies of teachers, etc.) with their cultural work are at this time fellow travelers and allies * of the Turkish working masses. As already noted, the bulk of the Turkish peasant woman was not captured by the movement. and very little has been done to involve the village woman in the struggle for political equality and change in everyday life. A fact of exceptional importance in the life of a Turkish woman is the new family law, which will undoubtedly yield colossal results both in terms of improving the position of a Turkish woman and in changing family life and morals. The revolution of morals is more difficult and more difficult than the social and political revolution. In Turkey, it is just beginning and will undoubtedly change the manners, way of life, raise the position of the Turkish woman and give her political equality, contrary to the wishes of the backward reactionary forces, still led by the powerful Muslim clergy. It should be noted here that just as the Turkish political revolution took place under the strongest ideological influence and with the friendly help of the peoples of the USSR, the entire cultural life of new Turkey, and above all reforms in the field of everyday life and a radical change in the position of women, undoubtedly reflected our roar solution and all that new in the field of law, education of youth, emancipation of women, which has been achieved by the peoples of the USSR.