1. General outline of the country
Persia occupies a significant part of the Iranian plateau. By its territory (1.650.000 sq. Km.) It is larger than France, Germany, Spain and Belgium combined. In the north, Persia borders on the USSR; in the south it is washed by the waters of the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Sea; in the west, Persia borders on the Arab Kingdom of Iraq (English, Mandate, Territory) and Turkey; in the east with Afghanistan and Baluchistan. The population of Persia is approximately estimated at 10,000000 people. (exact statistics do not exist in Persia). The composition of the population is as follows: Farsites or Persians proper — 55-60%, Turkic-Mongols —25%, other various nationalities about 15 ° / o-Most of the country's surface is covered with numerous mountain ranges with valleys between them. In Central Persia, there are vast saline deserts (Dasht-i-Kavir and Dasht-i-Lut). The main occupation of the inhabitants is agriculture. The most suitable areas for agricultural work are the Caspian provinces, Seistan and the Karuna river valley. A significant increase in agriculture in Persia is hampered by a lack of water. The need for artificial irrigation creates significant difficulties for the correct use of the unusually fertile Persian soil. In addition, the weak side of Persian agriculture is also the primitive forms of land cultivation, technically backward and helpless. The main products of Persian agriculture are wheat, rice, cotton, opium and fruits. Regions of northern Persia rank first in terms of the number of crops planted with grain and fruit. The coast of the Persian Gulf is rich in dates, which are one of the most important exports of Persian Arabistan. A fairly significant economic sector of the country is animal husbandry. Livestock raising is spread mainly in the areas of nomadic tribes and serves as their main source of income. Sheep breeding is most developed, which is of great importance, both for domestic consumption and for export. Turning to other sectors of the national economy of Persia, it should be noted that it has rather large mineral wealth, which is still almost completely undeveloped. The absence of '-ways of communication, plus primitive and costly methods of development, make the exploitation of mining subsoil commercially unprofitable for the time being. Moreover, Persia is rich in oil. The main oil-bearing lands are located in the south of Persia and are being developed by an English concession company, namely the Anglo-Persian Oil Company. Oil deposits have also been found in Northern Persia, but they have not yet begun to be exploited. According to Muslim law, the land in Persia cannot be a private property. In fact, this law has not been fulfilled for a long time. The theory is completely at variance with established landowning practice. In fact, land in Persia is fully owned by individuals. The official forms of Persian land tenure are: 1) state land (khalise), 2) church land (vakuf), 3) communal (umumi), 4) landlord (arbabi) and small-scale (khurd- malik). The main type of land relations in Persia is large-scale land ownership. A huge part of the land area is in the hands of large landowners who often own more than 200-300 villages. The harsh land mobilization that took place in Persia led to the fact that most of the entire land fund was at the disposal of a small group of khans and tax farmers who came out of the ranks of the big trading bourgeoisie. The fate of the Persian peasant is hard and bitter. Hard work, eternal lack of food, servitude, servitude, The exploitation of the landowner haunts him throughout his life. The Persian village, where the Persian peasant lives and works, is a bunch of dirty houses molding around each other, heating up in the heat and giving no shade in winter. In summer days, when the whole family is a Persian peasant. goes to work, dirty kids dressed in rags are busy with sad herds near empty shacks. Rarely, rarely in a Persian village you can meet funny and laughing kids. Early need and the hopelessness of the environment leave a mark of premature seriousness and concern on children's faces. Only late in the evening do the tired peasants return home. The work of the Persian peasant is thankless. A wooden shovel — instead of a plow, horse hooves for squeezing grain out of the ears and the same kind of primitive tools — that's all he has to work his small plot. Lack of water, the need for artificial irrigation also play a significant role in the distressing peasant situation, but the worst scourge for the Persian peasant is rent bondage. The Persian peasant is forced to give the almighty landowner a good half of his difficult harvest, and himself be content with a half-starved existence. In the hands of the landowner, in addition to the land and water supplies necessary for irrigation, there are also draft animals, grain for sowing fields, which are loaned to peasants under difficult conditions. EU whether to add more state taxes, the position of the Persian peasant looms in all its unsightly clarity. Approximately 3/3 of his entire peasant income goes to pay various levies and taxes. All that remains for the Persian peasant to feed himself and his family. Industry in the literal sense of the word in Persia almost does not exist. One of the main reasons for the severe stagnation of the Persian national economy is the lack of convenient communication routes. Persia, with the exception of the small Julfa-Tabriz line, has no railways at all. The main type of Persian transport is pack. Caravans of camels and donkeys leisurely deliver goods from one point in Persia to another. Cars circulating between major cities are fighting with them for the road. Rows of frightened camels, caught by a car, rush in all directions, dump bales from fear and often die under the wheels of the engine. The car and the camel are two opposites, two poles of the modern Persian road. There are few large cities in Persia. The most important of them are: Tehran, Tabriz, Mashhad, Isfa Gan, Shiraz and several ports on the coast of the Persian Gulf and the Caspian Sea. In appearance, Persian cities are not much different from villages. From a distance, a city from a village or village can be distinguished only by a slightly wider area and by a larger number of buildings. Once the Persian city was surrounded by an adobe wall. The streets of the Persian city are terribly narrow. The main city arteries are called "khibans" (avenues). These are the same streets, but a little more tidy and with a kind of pavement. A Persian street is characterized by running water running on both sides, or in the middle. This water is used for washing clothes, performing ritual ablutions, etc. Due to its terrible pollution, this very water is one of the important reasons for the extreme anti-hygienic state of Persian cities. Being essentially ditches, it is very harmful and unhealthy. Its frequent use as drinking water leads to various epidemic diseases. The central nerve of the city is the bazaar. The Persian Bazaar is not only a collection of stalls and stalls; it also has political significance. The voice of the Persian bazaar is impressive; they listen to him, a lot depends on him; they are afraid of him. This is not surprising, if we remember that the predominant type of Persian merchant class is a small market trader who very, very much influences public opinion. The bazaar also serves as an instrument of political struggle. The closure of a bazaar is an act of protest, something like a demonstration, a strike, etc. Bazaars in large cities are usually covered buildings with countless intricate passages and passages. Slightly shaded sunlight streams through the tall, tile-covered dome. Entering the bazaar, you immediately find yourself in the atmosphere of the fierce eastern hustle and bustle, sharp noise and specific smells. It smells like nutmeg, orange. There is a faint scent of palm trees from the heaped mountains of fresh dates and coconuts. On both sides of the bazaar galleries are shops. Here are a number of the manufactory trade: mountains of fabrics, patterned Persian silks, foreign fabrics, the so-called "colonial cheapness" thrown by foreign importers on the undemanding Persian market. Next are the craft ranks. Here the air splits from the impact of copper and from the metal fuss of tools, working here artisans. Not only people, but also donkeys, laden to overload, scurry along the narrow aisles of the marketplace. In the evenings, kerosene lamps are placed on these donkeys, throwing sparse light into the back streets of the market. Here, on the territory of the bazaar, for visiting merchants there are "caravanserais" with extensive storage rooms. Camels that have come from afar are located in them. From early morning to late evening, the bazaar does not stop its intense activity. It works like a wound-up machine, accompanied by the shuffling of numerous feet and a high guttural dialect. * ** Persia has long been a tasty morsel for European powers (mainly for tsarist Russia and England), interested in its dismemberment as quickly enslavement. The entire recent history of Persia is marked by outright plunder and violence by foreign imperialism. Tsarist Russia and England strove at all costs to weaken the resistance of the Persian state, to make it completely helpless in order to transform Persia into their colony. in Persia, a certain shift begins towards breaking up the old reactionary forms of economic relations. This time is characteristic of Persia with a large increase in Western influences, and an influx of foreign capital, which gradually pulled Persia into the orbit of the world economy. England and then Tsarist Russia, leaving overt methods of armed violence to influence Persia, switched to the system of the so-called "peace penetration ". Through various financial transactions, mainly loans to the Persian government, which is always in need of money, England and Russia are gradually acquiring a decisive influence on the economic and political life of the country. Little by little, all the lucrative articles of the Persian national economy float away into foreign hands. So England and Russia were given numerous concessions to exploit the most important wealth of Persia. All Persian customs, banks, communication routes, etc., were at their disposal. The ever-increasing inflow of foreign capital to Persia contributed to a change in the old feudal forms of the Persian economy. The former isolated position that Persia occupied with its subsistence economy began to change gradually. A previously non-existent foreign market appears for it, consuming the products of Persian agriculture; commercial capital with its representative of the petty commercial bourgeoisie was born. in Persia was marked by general, widespread dissatisfaction with the internal system of government of the Qajar dynasty, as well as shameless enslavement of Persia by foreign imperialism. The young Persian bourgeoisie was bound hand and foot by a state system that did not meet its interests at all. Attempts by the Persian merchant bourgeoisie to switch over to their local factory industry have met with failure due to fierce foreign competition. The Shah's government did absolutely nothing to protect the main interests of the indigenous industry, but, on the contrary, entered into customs agreements with foreign states (England and Russia), which were extremely beneficial for the latter. The Persian clergy were not happy with the existing system. It feared for its privileges and influence in the country. Frightened by the government's interference in its hitherto monopoly area of ​​justice and public education, the clergy begins to rebel and oppose the old regime, which is already beginning to crack. The feudal lords are also dissatisfied. The Shah, gradually selling the country to foreigners, does not share with anyone. Feudal lords, accustomed to the division of profits, begin to get embittered, seeing that they did not get anything, that they were bypassed.In 1906, under the direct influence of the Russian revolution of 1905, a struggle began for a new form of government — the Persian constitution. The instigator of the revolutionary movement was the urban handicraft bourgeoisie, with the support of a part of the Persian clergy and at first even large landowners, which achieved victory. The constitution was won. But already in 1908, reactionary elements, with the active support of tsarist Russia, crushed the 1st Majlis (Persian, parliament). The triumph of the reactionaries did not last long. In the north and south, revolutionary detachments are formed from both sides, moving to Tehran, which, after several battles with the Shah's troops, was occupied. Mohammed Ali Shah was forced to flee and take refuge in Russia. The trade and craft bourgeoisie, which was the most active element in the struggle for a constitution, having achieved it, was unable to retain its positions. On the contrary, the large feudal landowners contrived to use the new conditions 100%. Using the voices of their peasants, who are entirely dependent on them, the landowners easily carried out the candidates they needed for the Mejlis, thus making it an obedient instrument in their hands. The onslaught of foreign imperialism on Persia after the revolution not only did not diminish, but, on the contrary, reached colossal proportions. In 1907, the famous agreement on the division of Persia into zones of influence was concluded between England and Russia. In fact, with this treaty, the two imperialist powers, without the knowledge of the Persian people, arbitrarily, without asking anyone, cut Persia into two halves. One half (northern), under the agreement, went to Russia for its undivided political and economic exploitation. On the same terms, the southern part of Persia went to England, which contributed to the rapid disappointment of the radical layers of the Persian people with the real results of the revolutionary movement, and especially in England. England, at the beginning of the Persian revolution of 1906-9, provided all kinds of support to the Persian revolutionaries in their struggle against the old regime, English "revolutionary spirit" was explained by nothing more than a desire to spoil tsarist Russia closely associated with reactionary groups, in particular with Mohammed himself -Ali Shah. Later this situation changed. England, frightened by the rapid growth of the revolutionary movement in the country, very soon found a common language with Tsarist Russia, so that the subsequent stages of the struggle for a constitution passed under the sign of joint Anglo-Russian pressure on the revolutionary movement, and joint attempts to strangle it. , despite its declared strict neutrality, it was turned into a springboard for the Anglo-Russian troops conducting military operations against Turkey. In fact, during these years, Persia did not exist as an independent state. The true masters of the country were the Turkish, English and Russian prowling on its territory.troops. The October Revolution liberated the Persian people from their primordial enemy, tsarist imperialism. The Soviet government, in connection with its general policy, abandoned the old violent methods of tsarist Russia towards Persia. It renounced all the privileges and advantages enjoyed by foreigners in Persia, it returned the property that belonged to the Persian people, canceled all agreements and treaties with England directed against Persia, etc. England, taking advantage of the withdrawal of Russia, began to rapidly seize the abandoned positions. She extends her influence not only to southern Persia, but also to northern Persia. Anglo-Persian trade is growing. In 1918-19. she ranks first. The culminating point of British rule in Persia is the conclusion in 1919 of the famous Anglo-Persian treaty. Under this treaty, Persia effectively became an English colony; fortunately for Persia, this treaty was not destined to be enforced. This was prevented by many circumstances, mainly the influence of Soviet Russia, which was friendly and benevolent to its eastern neighbor. In 1921, a Russian-Persian treaty was signed, which consolidated friendly ties between both peoples. In the same year, the activity of Reza Khan, who is now the head of the Pahlavi dynasty, begins. Reza Khan, an officer of the central Cossack division, was the soul of the coup in Tehran in 1921. As a result of the latter, Reza Khan becomes Minister of War. He forms a national army and by force of arms subjugates the border semi-feudal khans, who until that time were almost independent from the central government. Soon Reza Khan was already the prime minister and supreme commander in chief. He suppresses the uprising inspired by England in the south and leads a course aimed at strengthening and centralizing Persia. The movement against the Qajar dynasty, which began in 1924 in the country, takes on a republican character. The same Reza Khan is being nominated for the presidency. Thanks to the backwardness of the masses and the reactionary role of the Persian clergy, feudal lords and landowners, the slogans of the republic are being defeated. The second part of Reza Khan's activity is already of a somewhat different character. Relying at the beginning of his career on the so-called "progressive bloc" consisting of the trade and artisan bourgeoisie and the urban intelligentsia, Reza Khan gradually begins to draw closer to the reactionary landowning groups and clergy. The reactionary role of the top strata of the Persian army is also of great importance. The officers, thanks to the system of distribution of large estates for military merit, turned into a group closely associated with representatives of large commercial landownership. By this time, Reza Khan himself was the largest landowner in Persia. On October 31, 1925, the Majlis decided to overthrow the old Qajar dynasty. On December 12, 1925, Reza Khan was elected shah and head of the new Pahlavi dynasty by the founding assembly of Reza Khan. The fact of the establishment of a monarchical regime in Persia can serve as a kind of completion of the compromise and half-hearted policy that was pursued by Reza Khan in the second half of his activities. to its essence, it is not capable at the present time of truly reformatory activity. Hence the 'treading water and uncertain policy in many areas of political and cultural life of Persia, in particular in the women's question of interest to us. The national liberation movement in Persia is far from complete. The English "danger" still has very strong and strong roots. The future of Persia largely depends on the path that it will choose. It must make a choice between the predatory and tenacious British imperialism, seeking to rely at the moment on Reza Shah and the Soviet Union, a friend of the oppressed eastern countries, an enemy of all violence and seizure. 
2. The woman of the privileged classes
At the very beginning of the description of the life and everyday life of a Persian woman, it is necessary to especially highlight the woman of nomadic tribes, with her patriarchal-clan way of life. Despite the fact that she does not know the veil and harem, her whole life is subordinated to the norms of ancient life, terribly backward and conservative. According to her position and character, the Persian nomad makes up a separate group in the total mass of the female population of Persia, while the main subject of our presentation is the typical settled Persian woman, that is, actually a Persian. Moving on to considering the legal status and typical everyday features of her life (in many respects the same for all classes of the female population), it is necessary to note the most important articles of the "Sharia" (Muslim spiritual code), which regulates all aspects of the life of a Persian woman. First of all, according to the "Sharia" and According to the usual Persian law, a Persian woman can in no way be a legal entity. In short, the Persian, as interpreted by spiritual lawyers, is simply a powerless creature that does not play any role not only in public life, but even in a narrow family life. The obligatory wearing of the veil, the categorical prohibition of any communication with strangers, with the exception of one's own husband, the impossibility of using one's powers for socially useful labor, created the usual type of Persian woman — a thing suffocating in an atmosphere of ignorance and idleness. The Koran (the holy book of Muslims) speaks very little and very vaguely about a woman. Only in later times, on the basis of supposedly Qur'anic indications, did the privileged position of a man take shape. The fact is that Arab rule in Persia entailed a general belittling of the entire Persian people. In subsequent eras, in connection with the flourishing of the Persian statehood, the Persians As for the Persian women, the regime of lawlessness and oppression remains in force in the old fashioned way and thanks to the difficult economic conditions and the help of the ingenious chicanery of spiritual lawyers consistently develops and strengthens. The Persian woman is a Zoroastrian of the pre-Islamic period, i.e. In the 7th century AD, before the adoption by the Persians of the religion of the Arabs, in many respects she was freer than subsequent generations of Muslim women. A small number of adherents of the ancient Zoroastrian religion have survived to this day in Persia. They live mainly in the mountainous region. Yezda and are known as gebras. The main occupation of the gebras is trade. Their religion is imbued with mysticism and has a dualistic character. Its basis lies in the struggle between two principles — good and evil, purity and impurity. Hence, the Zoroastrians have a cult of fire as a purifying element. In the modern Hebrew woman, you can trace the difference between her and her Muslim sister. In contrast to the Persian Muslim woman, the Zoroastrian has the right to appear with an open face; they do not disdain her; she does not seem to be something unworthy and shameful, everything that a Persian woman is at the present time. General Persian conditions, of course, left their mark on the position of the Gebrian woman, in the direction of infringing on her rights, pushing her into the background, etc. However, it is necessary admit that the position of a Gebrian woman is still somewhat better than the plight of a Muslim woman. The childhood of a Persian woman is as bleak as her whole life is bleak. The four walls of "enderun" _ (the inner part of a Persian house intended exclusively for women), the gossip of harem inhabitants, grumpy and rapidly aging from a sedentary life - this is the lot of a Persian girl from more or less prosperous families. Any Persian girl from birth immediately falls into unequal conditions compared to their boy brothers. Among the Persians, it is considered unacceptable, almost a shame, to mention in a conversation, at least by chance, about a daughter who was born, about the health of his girls, etc. If you ask a Persian how many children he has, he will think for a minute, and then he will proudly name the impressive number of his offspring, referring exclusively to his sons. Girls are not taken into account; it is inconvenient to talk about them and in general they are considered something like an annoying misunderstanding, bringing nothing but trouble and grief. So we see that from the very cradle they begin to look at the Persian as a completely worthless and useless thing. From a very tender age, along with her mother's milk, the little Persian sucks in the specific atmosphere of the harem premises with a gathering of women intended exclusively for a specific purpose, women, by force of circumstances, which have become, instead of useful members of society, mere objects of male lust and amusement. A Persian girl's day passes between dusty mat with a pile of rags piled on them. They walk very rarely. The rooms where they live and sleep, often in whole batches, are darkish, badly ventilated rooms with an abundant amount of dust that firmly settles on children's lungs. Persian from 9-12 years old is already a girl of marriageable age and does not dare to appear on the street with an open face. This is the law of "Sharia" and many children's lives are inexorably driven to it, regardless of their health and capabilities. Persian girls are usually very early formed into women. The process of physical maturation in young Persian women is much faster than their intellectual development. The overwhelming majority of Persian women remain for the rest of their lives a deeply ignorant creature, indifferent to anything essential and important. The only thing that the Persian is well versed in is the simple area of ​​erotic science. Some European "researchers" who are fond of the "exoticism" of the East even try to prove that the Persian woman, by her inner structure, is exclusively intended for the role of a qualified mistress. This is her vocation, as they say, and more cannot be asked of her. Of course, all these fables about the predestination of a Persian woman are sheer nonsense. The type of woman who is a professional mistress is created not by some internal peculiarities, but by the general system of upbringing of Persian girls, who from childhood get used to looking at themselves exclusively as a living commodity. The design of such views on women and the influence of classical Persian poetry, in to a large extent imbued with a specific eroticism, which created a mystical cult of the female body and beauty. With such views on her role in society, a young Persian woman approaches the most important stage of her life, not rich in events, to marriage. According to the Koran, marriage is mandatory. All women must get married. The following forms of marriage exist in Persia: permanent marriage, that is, marriage between a free man and a woman. In this marriage, the wife, after the death of her husband, remains the heiress of all his property. Then the marriage "sige", that is, temporary, concluded for a certain period, moreover, the husband at any time has the right to release his wife before the expiration of the term, in short, simply kick out into the street. Shige is the most common form of marriage in Persia. Given the extreme ease of entering into a temporary marriage for a wide variety of periods, often just a few days, "shige" borders on prostitution. Strictly speaking, this form is prostitution legalized by the Shariah. After divorce, i.e. after the expiration of the contract, the husband is obliged to pay his wife maintenance for three months and 10 days, in case of her possible pregnancy. This ends all the obligations of a husband to his wife. "Shige" opens up a wide field for the exploitation of women. Often, a woman weighed down by need, being in a hopeless situation, is forced to conclude conditions for a temporary marriage at the lowest price and for any period. The mullahs turn a blind eye to these ugly phenomena, and thoughtfully sanction fictitious divorces without going into the essence of the matter. But even in official marriages, which are called "permanent" in Persia, a woman's rights are far from protected. The husband here is also the complete master over his wife, over her thoughts and actions. He has the opportunity to divorce her at any moment, for this he needs, as the Shari'a dictates, just turn his back on her. In case of divorce, the children remain with the father. The father also has the right not to keep his children and pass them on to some other woman for upbringing. So, according to Sharia, a girl who has reached 9 years old can be married. A marriage takes place, if it is permanent, through the conspiracy between the parents of the bride and groom. Often, right up to the wedding, the bride and groom do not know each other. The marriage code provides for many details, both an external ritual character and an internal family routine. So, for example, he obliges the husband who takes a girl of noble birth to his house, to provide her with a servant, etc. On the contrary, the pretty daughters of the poor, who fall into the harem of a rich Persian, are content with the share of the younger wife. They fall under the control of an angry and grumpy "banu" (first wife) and often suffer beatings and bullying. A Persian wedding is by its very nature not a very joyful ceremony. After all the formalities associated with the conclusion of the marriage contract, the day of the bride's move to the groom's house with all her belongings and outfits is appointed. On the same day, the ransom for the bride must be paid in money or things. The size of the ransom is set by agreement, depending on the property status of the spouses. The day of the bride's moving to the groom's house is the most solemn, they are preparing for it for a long time. In the morning in the bride's house there are feverish preparations and preparations. The procedure for the wedding gathering of the bride and groom usually takes place in the bathhouse. It should be noted that the Persian bath is not only a place where people wash, to a greater extent it has the character of a public entertainment. They sit in the baths, gossip, meet each other, relax. By the time of the “dressing” of the bride, her friends and relatives gather. They look at the bride with curiosity, admire colorful dresses, etc.intolerable hum from female voices and exclamations. Loud sobbing and crying are often heard, merging in a stream of general noise. In general, this whole ceremony has the character of a kind of "bachelorette party". Usually, in the evening, “boyfriends” come for the bride to take her to the groom's house. The hostess of the house presents a treat. Poor people often spend their last pennies on this business. Then the crying bride is put on a horse and taken to the groom. The journey is decorated very solemnly, usually accompanied by music and songs. Upon arrival, the bride is brought to the groom and, having joined their hands, are left alone in a special room. The wedding fun is in full swing by this time: women are treated in the "enderun", men are separately in the outer rooms of the house. The celebration usually lasts until late at night. At rich weddings, in addition to music, dances and songs, specially invited groups of wandering actors, magicians and dancers perform. Often at the end, fireworks are lit to complete the wedding feast. 1. Women of the mountains. Jefatanya. Polygamy, although considered the main type of family relationship in Persia, is actually not very common. According to Muslim law, every Persian has the right to take four wives and two concubines for himself, excluding "sige" wives, who are not counted. Who can maintain such a harem? - Naturally, only very rich Persians, who receive large incomes from their estates and government services, etc., can afford such a luxury. The bulk of the population, the middle classes and working people, in most cases are content with only one wife ... The exception is the observed plurality of some artisans and handicraftsmen, by the nature of their production interested in superfluous working hands. A Persian woman gets married early and grow old early. Living in harems before marriage, she learns from childhood and takes for granted her servitude. Thus, the marriage, and with it the life change that has taken place, the Persian almost does not feel. She again from one "Enderun" with his gossip and quarrels falls into another. That's all. The Persian woman's costume consists of a shirt, a jacket and a short skirt — it's for home; To go outside, the Persian woman puts on wide trousers, which are now being replaced by skirts in some places, puts a large black scarf over her head — plain or silk, called “chadur”, then a “rubande” veil of black hard gauze is put on her face, with cutouts for the eyes. Not long ago rubande were made of thick white gauze of very large sizes; they are still common in provincial towns and villages. The Persian spends most of her life within the four walls of her house. Each walk requires a special permission from the husband., Given with difficulty and reluctance. Let's see what a Persian dwelling is. A Persian city-type house is usually surrounded by an adobe wall. The house is entered by a low door with a knocker. In the middle of the yard there is a pool for water. The Persian house proper is divided into two parts - the outer "birun" and the inner "enderun". "Enderun" is a special room for women, something like a harem. Apart from the husband, only women, close relatives and doctors have access to the female half. The furnishings of the Persian house are very sparse. Rather, it is completely devoid of furniture. The only common furniture in Persian homes is a variety of mats that serve as chairs and beds. The Persians also love to decorate their houses with glass things — various candlesticks, candelabra, which are almost never used. The same can be said for Persian fireplaces. During the winter cold, they do not heat up and again carry a purely decorative service. For heating in Persian houses, there is a special device "kursi", which consists of a large woolen blanket, a table and a small brazier. Putting a burning brazier, in order to avoid a fire, on a table and wrapped in a huge blanket, the whole family warms up by the flaming coals, so they warm up during the day, and the nights are spent in the same way. The day of the Persian woman of the wealthy classes passes in complete idleness and boredom. As a rule, life in Eideroon begins early. From b hour. In the morning, the inhabitants of harems begin to wake up. With the onset of late morning dead boredom and dreary idleness reign in the Enderun. Women who have aged early from a sedentary life, half-lounging on soft mats, gossip and quarrel. These are the only social functions that are allowed to them by the "omniscient" clergy and are established by the way of life. Not to mention the Persian workers and peasant women, even among wealthy women and representatives of the aristocracy, education is spread to a minimum. According to American journalist Vincent Chiin, the Shah's wife and mother “Shahpur” (heir) can neither read nor write. Another queen, an aristocrat by birth, is barely literate. Nevertheless, women who do not particularly bother with reading have eye diseases that are almost universal. This is due to the wearing of the veil. From eternal The blood on the face of the eyes gradually deteriorates. The eye openings are small and insufficient., The visors of the hard calico, which impede the freedom of vision, are especially harmful to the eyes. Eyes from constant tension begin to water and decay. Often on the streets of Persian cities you can meet walking with an incorrect and stumbling gait of very young blind women who have lost their eyesight from the inevitable, like fate, "chadur". But that is not all. In addition to the eyes, the lungs also suffer. Tuberculosis is a constant companion of the Persian woman. This is not surprising if you remember that a Persian woman breathes a huge part of her life in the heated, unhealthy and dusty air that collects under the veil. On sultry days, when even with an open mouth there is nothing to breathe, the Persian is forced to literally suffocate in dense bedspreads, forced to breathe in the boiling atmosphere, from all sides of the enclosed space, between the mouth and the tissue inflamed like a fire. Early marriages (from the age of 9) also leave their mark on their health. On this basis, female diseases are terribly widespread among Persian women. Such is the wretched life of a Persian woman of the privileged classes, nevertheless placed in incommensurably better conditions compared to the life and life of a Persian working woman. 3. Persian working woman Persian working woman, almost from infancy, becomes the object of monstrous exploitation by something like a taciturn and submissive cash cow. The economic conditions of modern Persian life, an unusually weak and almost non-existent industry, led the working Persian woman to the need to sell her convict labor is almost for nothing. Hard and painful work without a glimpse of something better ahead, constant malnutrition, terrible illnesses - this is the lot of the Persian female worker and farm laborer. It goes without saying that no matter how dull and unenviable the life of a Persian woman of the upper classes, she in no way can it equal the almost tragic fate of a working Persian woman. A woman of the privileged classes, getting married quickly becomes dull, loses all cultural needs and, as it were, freezes in the sucking atmosphere of well-fed, almost bestial contentment. The Persian toiler, however, bears the yoke of double torture; on her shoulders she must endure the general regime of female lawlessness and oppression, plus harsh, sometimes downright overwhelming work. The girl of the Persian working masses in the full sense of the word does not know what childhood is. Even before the little peasant girl embarks on the path of hired labor, she is already performing various hard work and duties in her parents' house in the village. You can often observe the following picture - on a hot road, a tiny girl is moving, dragging a heavy basket or sack with all her might. The girl's face is covered with agonizing drops of sweat, her eyes bulge out on her forehead from tension, but she continues to walk and walk forward with touching obedience. And so from day to day. When a girl gets a little older and has 8-9 years of age behind her shoulders, she usually gets a job on rice, tea and tobacco plantations or ends up in some workshop, where, on a par with adult female comrades, she dries over painstaking and exhausting work — making a carpet. The cheapest labor in Persia is female. Only thanks to the beggarly payment of female labor could a number of industries develop in Persia, in particular, carpet. A Persian female carpet worker in Kermana in Sultanabad receives about 10 shai a day, which is about 8 kopecks. This explains the cheapness of the Persian carpet, which goes almost entirely to the foreign market. In Kerman, 7000 weavers are employed in carpet production, of which 75% are women, most of them teenage girls who receive pitiful pennies, which are not enough for basic necessities, even for a meager dinner. Women's labor is still quite widely used in the silk, brocade and match industry. A woman's working day in handicraft workshops in the summer lasts up to 16 hours. The premises of the workshops, where women have to spend most of their lives, are damp, dark and stinking cellars. The eternal lack of light, pillars of poisonous dust, monstrous mustiness, the absence of a hint of ventilation and ozonation, undermine the health of a working woman in several years. Among them, a huge number suffer from eye diseases, spoiling from work in carpets and other industries that require strong visual stress. Quite often a Persian woman, as a reward for her truly terrible work, receives eternal blindness, after which she is immediately kicked out into the street without any further ado ... After all, now she is no longer fit for anything, not even for the role of working cattle. There is nothing in Persia that resembles the protection of female or child labor. Women are completely left to the mercy of each individual entrepreneur, who is trying to somehow cut more than the beggarly wages of Persian women workers. The almost complete absence of a professional movement in Persia, in a strong step it is holding back the work of alleviating the plight of the Persian working woman. The female mass in Persia is not organized, scattered into small groups, which, of course, are unable to properly defend their vital interests. Another major factor in the defenselessness of the female laboring masses is their extreme backwardness and oppression. As we have already said, education is not always the lot, even for women of the upper classes, so where can a Persian worker and peasant woman think about it. In 1924, an attempt was made to introduce into the Majlis a requirement for a minimum labor protection, the introduction of an 8-hour working day, and improvement of conditions work in closed rooms, cutting windows in workshops, etc. The same project provided for the prohibition of the exploitation of child labor of Persian girls under 12 years old. Unfortunately, this attempt was unsuccessful. As before, to this day, Persian women workers are forced to endure unheard-of injustices and be content with ridiculously meager wages. Little better than the situation of female laborers languishing in the frenzied heat of cotton, tobacco, rice and tea plantations. Their working day stretches from early dawn, throughout the long summer day, until late at night. Sun-burned female faces and bent backs of Persians can be seen in almost all parts of Persia. In the sultry Gilan, an army of farm laborers, knee-deep in water, devoured by mosquitoes carrying malaria poison, work in the thick of it on rice plantations, receiving pitiful pennies for this, which many of them lack for their own funerals. Others languish on the cotton plantations of Khorosan, tobacco and tea plantations in the Caspian provinces. Everywhere they have the same inhuman labor - the same passive and downtrodden life. However, not all women from poor families can afford the luxury of receiving even these pitiful pennies thrown to them for their labor. Persia has a solid female unemployment rate, reaching very impressive numbers. The complete absence of developed industries where women workers could use their hands makes their position almost completely hopeless. Unemployment among Persian working women is further aggravated by the gradual proletarianization of the peasantry. More and more proletarian peasant women are looking for opportunities for application in any area. 2. Peasant labor in Persia. Their labor and strength. The original Persian production, where female labor is very widely used, namely carpet, has not come out of a state of severe crisis over the past few years. All this, of course, cannot but affect the already dreadful situation of the working Persian woman. The only salvation of a Persian working woman from the clutches of starvation is prostitution. In recent years, the percentage of female prostitution has increased significantly. The largest numbers fall on the largest cities of Persia — Tehran, Tabriz, etc. Along with female prostitution, the prostitution of teenage girls is also growing. Such are the horizons of a proletarianized Persian peasant woman, with a crooked mouth and eyes dry with sorrow, walking towards her death. As we have already indicated, the situation of a working woman in the villages in everyday life is very different from that of an urban Persian. For purely economic reasons, despite the existing prohibition, she actually walks with an open face. The scarcity of peasant and workers' dwellings does not always allow a division into external and internal (special) halves. Thus, the strict isolation of women, as is the case in cities, in villages and in the homes of poor Persians, is not always the case. In addition, the Persian poor has no harem. He has only one wife who works tirelessly. It would seem that all of the above facts should have influenced the speedy process of the emancipation of the Persian woman and her release from the quagmire of a dark and slavish existence. In reality, this is not so. The old way of life, with its view of women as a lower being, still enjoys tremendous influence and strength among the masses of the Persian people. This is facilitated, on the one hand, by the appalling ignorance of the popular masses, and on the other hand, the still not quite decayed organism of ancient economic forms, which immensely interferes with the forging of a genuine Persian proletariat, with a purely working-class self-awareness and ideology. she carries around the house; despite a lot of dirty work performed by her meekly and submissively, it is not considered a person. After getting married, she usually suffers from her husband a series of gross insults, bullying, beating and beating in abundance to her share. The Persian working woman is so beaten and belittled that it does not occur to her to protest or complain. However, there is nowhere to complain and no one. According to the spirit of the laws, a husband is an uncontrolled ruler who exercises judgment and punishment on his wife ... So, it must be admitted that the Persian toiler is not yet an active force that can stir up the swamp old way of life with its disgusting customs and mores. The leadership of the women's movement in Persia is in the hands of the thin layer of the urban intelligentsia and is still very insecure and timid.
4. Women's movement in Persia
For many centuries, a regime of oppression and oppression of the Persian woman took shape. The conservatism of Islam and especially the feudal system, which has not yet been completely outlived to this day, has given it special stability and strength. While in other eastern countries there has recently been a number of indicative shifts aimed at improving the legal and social status of women, the position of women in Persia has changed little. The Persian woman is still beaten and humiliated, she is still completely under the rule of the dead letter of the Qur'an and numerous prejudices. The influence of the mullahs on the mind of an ordinary Persian is still very strong, the activity of a Persian woman in the struggle for her emancipation is still very weak. The history of the women's movement in Persia does not shine with special diversity and significance. The Persian Women's Movement is the story of single Persian women who received a European education and tried to free a woman with their personal activities and example. The women's movement in Persia originated around the middle of the 19th century and had a purely cultural and educational character from its very foundation. The role of women in history Persia is extremely humble. It would be more correct to say that the Persian woman almost never figured in the political history of the country, as an active and effective element. Without touching on the wife of Nasr-ed-Din-Shah, who, according to some European observers, allegedly enjoyed a colossal influence on her husband-shah and at the same time on the general state life of Persia, influence, by the way, deeply controversial and inflated, let us note another Persian woman, daughter of the Kazvin mullah Kurret-ul-ein, who left a bright mark in the religious movement of the Babis, who attracted significant masses of the Persian people to their side. Babism is a religious sect that arose in Persia in the middle of the 19th century. Its founder was a native of the mountains. Shiraza-Mirza-Ali-Muhamed, who called himself "Babom", that is, ("The gate of truth"). With its rapidly growing influence, vivid preaching, often in an acute form, scourging the Muslim clergy and advocating for the equality of women, the new religion soon became the subject of severe persecution by the Persian government. So in 1850 in Tabriz the "women" themselves were executed, then numerous executions of his closest students and followers took place. In some cities of Persia, uprisings of the Babis broke out, suppressed with terrible cruelty by the Persian government. The role of Kurret-ul-ein (coolness of the eyes), as the daughter of the Kazvin mullah was called, in this movement was very great. In all corners of Persia, she preached the foundations of the new Babid religion, skillfully and talentedly criticizing the reactionary laws and customs of Islam. After the assassination (in the early 19th century) of Nasr al-Din Shah, who is believed to have fallen at the hands of a Babid, persecution of adherents of a new religion takes on especially acute forms. There is a form of beating of people only suspected of this dangerous heresy. Kurret-ul-ein does not lay down her arms all the time, her sonorous voice is heard wherever there are ears to listen. Kurret-ul-ein is one of the first women in Persia who dared to take off her chador, who dared to appear at numerous gatherings with an open face. How great was the strength of this outstanding Persian woman's insolence can be judged by the overwhelming impression that her appearance in the streets and bazaars produced. Her great personal charm, ability to speak, prove and win over listeners repeatedly saved her from the lynching of numerous fanatical fanatics. In the end, Kurret-ul-ein was nevertheless seized by the authorities and executed in Tehran in 1852. Stunning details have come down to us. "her execution. Kurret-ul-ein, already being placed against the wall for execution, asked permission to address the soldiers with the last words. When she was allowed to do so, she made a passionate and passionate speech, after which she herself ordered the soldiers to shoot. Activities Kurret- ul-ein, which developed although on the basis of the religious teaching of "baba", in many respects confused and half-hearted, but nevertheless definitely opposed to many reactionary customs of Islam, should be considered the first glimpse of the women's movement in Persia as it is understood in the present The significance of Kurret-ul-ein lies in the fact that she was the first single woman to bravely appear in the wider public arena well, that she was the first Persian to achieve immense popularity among the masses. In addition, her personal fearlessness and heroism, which became almost legendary, in subsequent generations of Persian women left a romantic trace of admiration and example. The real beginning of the women's movement in Persia must be considered the Persian revolution of 1906-9. Only from that time on, a Persian woman, of course more or less conscious and educated, begins to take an interest in political issues and bring all possible help in the struggle for new ideas. The awakening of women in Persia during these years was greatly facilitated by the tremendous growth of the Persian press, for the first time in its pages talking about the need to emancipate the Persian and involve her in the general cycle of life. Only from that time on did they begin to discuss the need for some kind of education for a Persian girl. Some radical newspapers speak about the categorical implantation of literacy among Persian women, etc. The ideological influence of the Transcaucasian revolutionaries, who took a large part in the first Persian revolution, also contributed to the awakening of the self-consciousness of the Persian woman. The strength of the liberation ideas brought from the Transcaucasus was generally reflected in the fate of the women's movement in Persia. Of course, the role of the Persian woman in the revolution of 1906-9 was, for obvious reasons, not very noticeable and significant. Nevertheless, some of them took an active part and often defended freedom with weapons in their hands. Persian women especially distinguished themselves during the heroic defense, the revolutionary Tabriz against the Shah's troops. There was even created a special women's battalion that fought in the same ranks with men. In the revolutionary troops, single women, dressed in men's suits, often took part in battles and skirmishes and, according to eyewitnesses, showed remarkable courage and loyalty to duty. After the proclamation of the constitution, the women's movement in Persia began to take on more organized forms. This is how a women's nationalist club is organized in Tehran, in which; a fair number of women participate, of course, from the privileged classes. At the meetings of this club, various topical issues of current politics are discussed, patriotic resolutions are passed against the interference of foreign powers in Persian affairs, etc. This time is characterized by some awakening of the harem woman, and the introduction into her musty atmosphere of gossip and love intrigues, new interests, ideas and views. Colossal ignorance even among women of the privileged classes, a narrow circle of spreading new ideas regarding the emancipation and liberation of women, made the women's movement in Persia a phenomenon of not a mass order. Only in recent years, due to the development of secular education in Persia, the percentage of women participating in the women's movement has slightly increased. The first educational institution in Persia, in which the daughters of aristocrats and the big commercial bourgeoisie studied, was the American women's school in Tehran. From here came a few cadres of women intellectuals who are at the head of the modern women's movement. What is the current position of the women's movement in Persia? As we have already indicated, the Persian women's movement is purely cultural in nature. Existing women's organizations in Tehran and other major cities have a direct goal of promoting education among women. The involvement of Persian female workers and peasant women in the work of women's organizations and circles is extremely weak. Rather, almost no work is being done in this direction. One of the largest women's organizations is the Women's Patriotic League in Tehran, which recruits its members from the Persian female intelligentsia and the wives of wealthy Persians. It is headed by the famous female activist Mer-Banu, a pupil of the American girls' school. Mer-Banu, remains a teacher there and devotes his whole life to the liberation of a Persian woman. In a conversation with an American journalist, Mer-Banu defined the league's work as follows: “We, says Mer-Banu, devote all our attention to the widespread popularization of women's education. Only with the creation of the necessary cadres of educated women can one think of further more energetic steps. I do not dream, Mer-Banu said further, about such things as removing the veil, etc. " From the above words of Mer-Banu, one can understand the nature of the women's movement and its leaders. The program of the women's patriotic league does not include an "attack on the Koran" and any abrupt steps that could offend anyone. The League is too ceremonious about religion, too afraid of angering the Persian clergy to be able to achieve any significant results. The only issue in which she shows some energy is the legal side of divorce. According to Persian law, a husband can divorce at any moment and send his wife away from him. On this basis, real tragedies are often played out, ending in frequent suicides of poor women who are inhumanely thrown into the streets. The woman, on her part, does not have the slightest right and opportunity to divorce her husband, even if he beats her, mocks her, etc. The Women's Patriotic League seeks to change the form of divorce in the direction of minimally protecting the interests of a woman and giving the act of divorce a reciprocity character. The league organizes meetings on these topics, invites radical speakers, etc. The special women's newspapers published in Tehran are also of some importance. In 1921, the rather popular magazine "Woman's World" was published, which was soon closed by the government. Then the newspaper "Lisan-e-Zenan" (Language of a Woman) began to exist, published before their time. The Persian women's press suffers from the common shortcomings of the Persian women's movement, namely a lack of activity, a vague platform and a narrow circle of readers recruited exclusively from the privileged classes. This is almost all the little that is being done to free the Persian woman by the official women's movement. The new Pahlavi dynasty did little to change the position of the Persian woman. The policy of Reza Shah in the women's question, as in other areas, suffers from ambiguity, unexpected leaps towards spiritual obscurantism, etc. The women's question can serve as an excellent example of the duplicity of the modern Persian regime. On the one hand, there has been a recent development of women's education, the opening of special women's schools, etc .; on the other hand, under the influence of the clergy, a decree was issued prohibiting women from walking on the same sidewalk with men: for women in some cities even special sidewalks have been created, and the transition from one sidewalk to another is punishable by a fine. This also includes the persecution in Persia of "Bahaism," a religious teaching that is tolerant and progressive towards women. In general, it must be said that the very fact of the restoration of the monarchy in Persia excludes the possibility of effective and radical reforms in general, and in particular in the field of the emancipation of the Persian woman. The October Revolution could not pass without leaving a trace for the cause of the emancipation of the Persian woman. The revolutionary movement that took place in Persia after October, to a large extent contributed to the propaganda of the slogans of women's liberation, It is also necessary to note the significant role of numerous Persian women who were educated in Soviet Russia and returning to their homeland, in drawing the most conscientious Persian workers and peasant women into work. The still completely dark and downtrodden Persian toilers are beginning to show very weak, but still signs of life. Economic processes also contribute to this. The proletarianization of the peasantry, the rise in the cost of living, etc., make the Persian peasant woman think, and make tangible changes in her psychology. In this sense, a letter from a Persian female worker published in a Tehran newspaper is interesting. In this letter to male readers, she writes: “You have never been touched by the unfortunate, truly regrettable position of the Persian woman. I am sure that if you suddenly regained your sight and looked into the horrifying pages of a woman's fate, if you saw all the torments, insults, insults we endure from our masters and about grief from our husbands, if you felt burning the tears we shed, then you would agree with our demands. If you saw a helpless unfortunate woman, lonely, without an intercessor, a woman walled up from all sides — you would not have tolerated a single minute, you would remove the veil of violence that envelops her soul, you would make her free. Enough to keep a woman in shame and humiliation! " This is what a woman worker writes. True, there are still few such votes among working women. The conditions of darkness, illiteracy and slave bondage are doing their job. True, the women's movement in Persia is still a cultural attempt of a thin layer of the urban intelligentsia. Newer, however, there is a certain shift in the mood and psychology of the Persian toiler. The shift is very significant, bearing in itself the possibilities of real emancipation of the Persian woman. The magnificent example of the liberated woman of the Soviet Transcaucasia will be of great importance for the success of the women's movement in Persia. The great work done by the Soviet government in the emancipation of women of the eastern nations and equalizing them in rights with men will play a crucial role in giving the Persian women's movement the lack of activity and scope. A free woman of Soviet Azerbaijan is a guarantee of genuine emancipation of a Persian woman from centuries of slavery and humiliation.