1. General outline of the Komi region
The autonomous region of Komi (Zyryanskaya) is part of the RSFSR, occupying the northeastern corner of its European part with a total surface area of ​​478.660 sq. kilometers. This territory, bounded from the north by the Arctic Ocean, from the east by the Ural ridge, and from the south by the Northern Uval, is a huge lowland, overgrown by 8 4 powerful, often impenetrable forests. To the north, near the coast of the Arctic Ocean, forests, giving way to frost, thin out and, finally, they pass into the tundra, sparsely overgrown with mosses and shrubs. But what. farther to the south, the more and more they spread out both in breadth and upward, passing in places into completely insurmountable jungles and presenting a majestic picture of primitive thickets almost untouched by man. The composition of forest species varies according to their geographic location. Closer to the north and in high places — larch, spruce and pine; along the river valleys and to the south — birch, aspen, black alder, cedar, oak. Occasionally this landscape is interrupted by arable land or meadows reclaimed as a result of the tense struggle of the farmer with the forests. In most cases, arable and meadow land lies along the rivers that make up here the oldest and, unfortunately, the only way to travel, because the region, by the grace of the old (tsarist) economic policy, is completely devoid of railways. The river network is dense enough. Among them it should be noted the Pechora with its numerous tributaries and the Vychegda. The rivers are rich in water. In addition, the region abounds in lakes, often connected by channels. The richest animal world of the region is in full accordance with the vegetation. In the north - ermine, arctic fox, marten, fox, and, of course, the constant breadwinner, deer. To the south, in the forests, bear, wolf, fox, elk, deer, squirrel, hare and a lot of game, of which hazel grouse and black grouse attract hunters most of all. There is a wide variety of fish along the ocean coast and in numerous lakes and ponds. Natural resources include graphite, oil (Ukhta river), coal (Usa river), gold (Ilych river) and iron. Climatic conditions are harsh. Not to mention the tundra and the areas adjacent to the sea coast, even to the south, winter is harsh and long. Although the summer is relatively hot, as, indeed, in all areas with a pronounced continental climate, the average annual temperature is about 0 °, and in any case not higher than 1 °. The Autonomous Region of Komi, formed on May 5, 1921 from the Ust-Sysolsk district and part of the Yarensky district of the North-Dvinsk province, part of the Pechora district of the Arkhangelsk province and part of the Cherdyn district of the Perm province, is currently divided into Izhmo-Pechora, Sysolsky, Ust-Vymsky and Ust-Kulomsky districts. Its population is over 220,000 people, of which 95.8% is the population of Koikhsel, and the urban population (8,800 people) is almost exclusively in the main city of the region, Ust-Sysolsk (7,130 people). Among the population, the predominant ethnic group are the Komi-Zyryans (Zyryan-92%, Russians-6%, Samoyeds-2%). The Komi (Zyryans and Permians), together with the Votyaks, are representatives of the eastern branch of the Finnish tribe and are the inhabitants of the region. In any case, evidence about them (mainly about Perm) is available in the Scandinavian sagas, in which they are known under the name Biarmia and from which one can conclude about a fairly high degree of material well-being, which the Komi achieved by the end of the first millennium of our era. Relations between Russia and the region began in the 11th century. In this century, the Novgorodians already took tribute from Pechora, and therefore from all the tribes who lived on the way there. The history of colonial invasion and capture of the region is common for that time. At first, the Novgorod ushkuiniks (pirate merchants), who sailed along the river systems on special boats (ears), were either engaged in direct robbery of the population, sometimes in the form of tribute, or in predatory commodity exchange. The ushkuiniks were followed by monks who established monasteries, seizing the best places and mercilessly plundering the population, and, finally, the princely and tsarist governors who improved the system. At the end of the 15th century, the Zyryans, who were so called Russians (they called themselves Komi), accept, however, purely outwardly, Christianity, and the growing Moscow, finally crowds out Novgorod, which is already tending to decline. In the future, the region shares the fate of numerous conquered regions and transfers the dominion of the tsarist governors, autocratic merchants (Stroganovs), governors and officials who knew no boundaries to arbitrariness and robbed the population with impunity. The following economic reference can serve as a vivid illustration of this several hundred years of predatory plunder of the population. At the beginning of our century, the main owner of the Ust-Sysolsk district was the state, which owned 15.500.000 dessiatines; about 73,000 dessiatines belonged to the family of the breeder Benardaki, and the total indigenous population accounted for about 61,000 dessiatines, of which only 43,500 dessiatines were arable land and hay. With such an amount of land, the share of the peasant household on average got about 350-380 poods of hay per year. d, i.e. not enough to feed a cow and horse. The numbers speak for themselves. In addition, they have a long history behind them, a whole mournful chronicle of colonial oppression, accompanied, in addition to economic ruin, by humiliating forms of everyday slavery, a flood of atrocities on the part of newcomers who did everything with impunity that their fantasy of tyrants told them. the front temporarily captured the edge. This seizure was stimulated mainly by the desire of British capitalism to seize the richest forest resources of the region. The White Guard hirelings, having previously enlisted the help of the kulak upper circles of the population, achieved temporary successes, flooding the forests and rivers of the region with the blood of the communists and the poor. Communists were drowned, shot and hanged in dozens and hundreds. But the short-term domination of the whites opened the eyes of the working people to the real nature of the hirelings of British capital and Russian landowners and manufacturers. Whites were expelled, and the pre-revolutionary ratio of land holdings was radically redistributed. At present, the total amount accounted for by manor land, arable land, hayfields and pasture is estimated at about 200 thousand dessiatines. The gross collection gives no more than 7.4 poods per capita. Livestock accounted for: 104.5 horses per 100 households, 232 cattle, 228 small cattle, 13.9 pigs. As a general conclusion, we can state the weak economic stability of the average agricultural economy of the region, especially if we take into account the very uneven economic power of individual farms and the presence of a strong kulak element, which sharply reduces the figures for the poor and even the middle farms. It is becoming quite obvious that there is a need for subsidiary trades, which the population is engaged in, mainly in the form of reindeer husbandry, hunting, hunting and fishing. Industry is almost completely absent in the region: as of October 1, 1925, there were 6 factory establishments with a total of 300 workers employed mainly in the mining industry. The reasons hampering the economic development of the region, first of all, must be attributed to the lack of communication routes, isolating it from consuming markets and preventing the use of the richest economic opportunities: of the annual growth of wood, calculated at 8.711 thousand cubic fathoms, only 252 thousand , i.e. 3 ° / 0. This circumstance, i.e. cut off from the market and difficulty in marketing, of course, significantly lowers the economic stability of the average peasant farm, shifting onto its shoulders high overhead costs for transporting goods and creating extreme difficulty in marketing the products of production. The economic heterogeneity of the Zyryan peasant farm has already been noted above. Along with the well-to-do, kulak-type economy, typical, for example, of the Izhemtsy (along the Izhma River), one can often find a poor man who feeds exclusively on "kach" - kasha made from dried crushed bark. This heterogeneity determines, of course, the living conditions in which the Zyryan has to live. If the hut of a prosperous owner is spacious and tidy, consists of several rooms, with the obligatory "godfather" room for guests - richly decorated with carvings inside, painted with bright red, green and yellow flowers, with a stove that does not let smoke into the room, - the poor do not only there is no "godfather", but he often lives in a chicken hut, filled with smoke during the fire. To exit, the latter is provided with either a wide open front door or a special "overhead door" - a simple hole, slid from the inside by a board when the stove is not heated. Sometimes, a wooden chimney is attached to the stove (going into the canopy and from there to the roof). Under these conditions and those frosts that prevail in the region, it is warm only in the upper parts of the dwelling, which is why the inhabitants arrange special beds that occupy almost half of the hut. This also explains the peculiar appearance of the Zyryan dwellings, in which the windows are located almost under the roof itself: family members usually spend all the time on the top, the light is more needed above than below. The type of clothing dictates the climate. The main winter costume is a malitsa — a bag made of reindeer skins, with fur inside, with holes for the head and legs, and with fur sleeves; on their feet - pimas, deep boots made of reindeer skins. This is the main and necessary winter outfit for a northern inhabitant. Even women don't cheat. it, decorating it only with skins and scraps of cloth. However, a number of residents wear, especially in summer, Russian-style clothes, although the malitsa dominates in everyday life. Women in the summer wear sundresses or simply canvas shirts, intercepted at the chest with a special bodice made of dye. Food, in general, is very modest, although the abundance of game allows you to eat meat more often than, for example, in the Central Russian zone. For this, the lack of bread affects very sharply and, as already noted above, a significant number of residents eat "kach" all winter, saving bread to hard spring work. In addition, milk, both cow and reindeer milk, and, of course, fish, is used for food, although in view of the high cost and poor quality of salt, it is not prepared for future use. And in clothes and in food, there are, of course, many shades created by one or another the degree of material well-being. This latter also determines the way of life. While the more prosperous Zyrian spends a significant part of his time at home, exploiting the laborer labor of the Samoyeds, excellent reindeer herders, to graze his herds, the poor Zyryan is forced to spend almost all his time outside the house, in the summer in the field or fishing, in the winter in the "winters" —Forest huts — on a hunt that sometimes lasts for months. In a difficult struggle with nature, step by step conquering scraps of arable land from the forest, in constant labor, continuously retreating under the predatory onslaught of the Novgorod and Moscow freemen, partially mixing with the conquerors and perceiving their customs and customs forced to push his pagan beliefs into the Christianity imposed on him by greedy monks, in the fight against the predatory instincts of his rich relatives, who quickly learned the lessons of robbery and violence and turned this science not only towards foreign Samoyeds or Ostyaks, but also against it, the Zyrian kept his language and customs and created his own way of life. He is Orthodox. But the belief in goblin, water brownies (ort) and other gods survived baptism. The Christian god is identified with Ian, the creator of the universe, in the affairs of which he does not interfere, as well as in the affairs of people. Christian saints (Ilya, Nikolai) turned into little gods. To clarify the nature of the attitude of the population to Orthodoxy, we note the following characteristic fact. Among the Zyryan everyday plots there are many tales of fools, and very often a priest or a deacon act as the most comic heroes. The fact of the stability of the religious beliefs of the Zyrian pagan has its basis in the environment and conditions of polar cattle breeding and characterizes only the resistance small people gave to their colonial oppressors. This national stability was most clearly manifested in the preservation of the language, and, for example, the Izhemtsy, representing a mixture of Russians and Komi in their ethnographic type, speak a pure Zyryan language. Many Zyryans, especially women, do not know the Russian language at all, although, of course, long-term domination and cohabitation left clear traces of Russian cultural influences not only in the language, but also in everyday life, and many Zyryan legends, tales and songs were directly borrowed from the Russians ( for example, epics about Ilya Muromets). Meanwhile, it should be noted that the russification policy of tsarism knew such facts as the prohibition of boys to speak their native language under the threat of being deprived of the opportunity to study. The October Revolution buried Tsarist Russia, and with it the attempts to stifle the national identity and culture of the peoples inhabiting it. If before 1918, for example, in the Pechora district there were only 5 public libraries and several school libraries, then by 1921 it had 22 volost libraries, 14 reading rooms, 12 theaters and 3 clubs organized on the initiative of the localities.

Of this number, there were 18 Zyryansk libraries, 6 reading rooms, 10 theaters and 2 clubs. The drive for enlightenment in the region is enormous. Not to mention the fact that literacy among Zyryans, in general, is very high in comparison with other sectors of the all-Union front of education (the percentage of literacy - in Russian and Komi languages ​​- 28.2%), the state of the school network alone provides clear evidence of this ... According to the data for 1924, there were 221 schools with 13,122 students in the region, 6 with 2,764 students in seven years, 5 with 966 students in 2 levels, and 3 with 389 students in technical schools. The number of Komi students in the higher educational institutions of the Union reaches 300 people, and provides the future of the region with cultural workers. Speaking about the cultural or economic revival of the region, which came with the Soviet regime, one should not lose sight of the colossal difficulties that stand in this way. The main one is off-road. And if you consider that on G / 2 sq. km of territory accounts for only 1 person, and the villages are often separated from each other at a distance of 100-150 km. then it will become clear the need for unanimous and strenuous efforts capable of providing the region with the necessary cultural and economic flourishing.
2. Pre-revolutionary zyryanka
As a general rule, the position of women among the Zyryans has many advantages over that of women, not only among their closest neighbors, the Samoyeds, or Ostyaks, but also among the vast majority of the nationalities of the USSR. This is explained both by the living conditions and by the influences that the region suffered. The fact is that the Novgorod conquest also affected the way of life. The Novgorod woman, on the other hand, did not know the humiliating constraints in her personal and public life, which took place in the vast majority of regions of Russia. On the other hand, the Tatar conquest, which affected the position of the Russian woman and led her to prison imprisonment, passed by the edge. In addition to, however, these historical conditions, the whole environment of life and the need for a stubborn struggle with nature, in which women played an important role, determined the achievement of a certain degree of independence by the Zyryan woman and provided her with the necessary energy. Spending most of the time outside the home — in the summer fishing and hunting, in the winter hunting — the Zyryan would shift all the work of housekeeping and even agricultural labor to the woman, who thus got used to an independent position. True, this independence was acquired at the cost of extremely hard work, but for that he also provided Zyryanka with a certain amount of respect and independence and saved her from the contemptuous attitude of the male population, which her closest neighbors, the Samoyed and Ostyachka, experience on themselves. favorable conditions do not mean favorable ones yet. And if we leave aside the comparison, the objective conditions of the existence of the pre-revolutionary zyryanka made it extremely difficult to equalize her in rights with a man, or rather, completely excluded this possibility. Not to mention the negative impact of Moscow customs on the life and position of the Zyryan woman, or the rather strong influence of the Old Believers in the region, who fled from religious persecution, and, of course, brought here their despotic treatment of a woman with them - the difficult working conditions left no room for a planned struggle for the final emancipation of women. Legal and economic regulations also made it impossible for Zyryanka to secure its independence. The head of the family has always been the husband, who was considered the owner of the house, land and all property, sometimes receiving the wife’s property as a dowry. And although Zyryanka, as we mentioned above, very often ran the household on her own, her husband remained its actual owner, on whose side, in the event of any conflict, both the law and public opinion were. In addition, in Zyryansk life there existed, and has not been obsolete to this day, a number of shy rules that isolate a woman from participation in public life and consolidate her subordinate position in relation to her husband. We now try to trace the life of the pre-revolutionary zyryanka in its most important and typical moments. * ** The Zyryan had a daughter. The birth of any child is a joy for the family, for a worker will grow out of him, extremely valuable in the extremely small population of the region. And since the Zyryan woman is famous all around as an unusually energetic and enterprising worker, and, moreover, according to the unanimous public opinion, is endowed with exceptional physical beauty, her appearance does not cause the feeling of disappointment that occurs among the Samoyeds or Ostyaks. And although the Zyrian prefers his son to his daughter, because the latter will leave the family sooner or later, this does not affect the child. Maternal care remains the same, and the father, when he is at home, no, no, and fondles his daughter. The situation in which a girl spends the first years of her life naturally depends on the degree of material well-being of her parents. In wealthier families, food is better, clothing is warmer, and the room is more spacious and cleaner than that of the poor. And the mother, who has the opportunity to shift part of the work, and in any case the most difficult, onto the shoulders of laborers or laborers, devotes more time and care to the child. For the poor, the conditions of the initial upbringing are terrible. In a cold, semi-smoked hut, a child early learns to appreciate the warmth of the beds, and almost never leaves, crawling alone or under the dubious supervision of older brothers or sisters; often it falls from there. Hygienic conditions also leave much to be desired, for with continuous hard work, the mother has little time to keep the hut clean, although there are aspirations for this. The child first feeds on maternal milk, then on reindeer or cow's milk, if there is one, and very early goes to the food of adults, with the inevitable "swing" among the poor, which is extremely difficult for his physical development. It is not surprising, therefore, that there is a large percentage of mortality among children and various kinds of diseases, which are also treated primarily with quackery. The child speaks his native language at home. In this respect, zyryanka was especially distinguished by its stubborn resistance to Russifiers the policy of tsarist Russia, and did not allow her children, and especially girls, to learn Russian. Among women, many did not know the Russian language at all, which they perceived as the language of enslavers, predatory officials who always tried to offend a defenseless native. From an early age, a growing girl was involved in work, often difficult. First, she helps the mother in cleaning the room, then cooking, sewing dresses, caring for livestock, and supervising small children. In winter she carries firewood into the house, in summer she drives cattle to pasture. And already from the same years it is surrounded by pictures of a harsh and majestic panorama of forests, advancing from all sides on arable land lying on the banks of the river. Her psyche is influenced by stories about devil, water and all kinds of devils with which she is scared and faith in which she retains until death. Although, in general, as we noted above, public education and literacy among the Zyryans is at a relatively high level, the girl was very rarely sent to study, so that girls made up 15% of all schoolchildren. The inequality of position compared to boys affects not only education. Already from a young age, a somewhat contemptuous attitude towards women begins to be shaded, which, however, does not take on those exceptionally ugly forms that it has among the Samoyeds or Ostyaks. The boy early learns to consider his participation in hunting or fishing as something that distinguishes him very favorably from women's labor. And although, for example, the Zyryanskaya girl already rides well, she is still far from the “heroism” of a boy who spends the winter months with her father in the forest on the hunt. However, while the girl still lives in the family, this inequality does not affect so sharply. That is why, growing up, onance. in a hurry to get married, the pre-Komi woman, reading to look around first and choose a husband according to her heart. To the honor of the Zyryans, one must include the fact that forced marriage has almost no place in them: marriages are concluded on the basis of a voluntary agreement, in which love attraction plays an important role. The latter occurs during the well-known Zyryan "sit-downs" where mainly young people gather. At these "sit-downs", where beer plays an important role, love interests often turn into love affairs. The latter, i.e. premarital relationships are generally extremely common in the region and very often turn into marriage. In contrast to these seemingly extremely "easy" morals, a zyryanka in marriage, as a rule, remains true to her affection and marital "adultery" almost does not take place. As for premarital sexual relations, the Zyryan public looks at them very condescendingly. Even their parents don't usually judge them. If this relationship leads to childbirth, the child is willingly accepted into the family, so that, for example, infanticide is completely absent. The number of "illegitimate" in the region before the revolution was relatively extremely high, especially since Christianity did not manage to consolidate in the popular consciousness the idea of ​​the necessity and sanctity of the church marriage rite. Ancient "kissing engagement" and "weddings around the broom bush" are much more popular than matchmaking and weddings. The latter usually only reinforces the former. This freedom of sexual relations is dictated in all likelihood by a biological factor, that is, the desire to save the tribe from extinction. It is also interesting to note that in wedding songs, as a rule, there are no Russian words at all, while the Russian influence in songs and folk tales in general is extremely strong. Very rarely Zyryanka does not get married. Above, we have already noted the physical attractiveness of Zyryan women. Since the idea of ​​female beauty, and indeed of beauty in general, is, of course, highly conventional, indisputable only within the limits of a given racial or tribal type, we make this statement on the basis that the opinions of all nationalities living in the region agree on it. or adjacent to it. Both a Russian settler, a Samoyed, and a Vologda resident gladly marry a homely Zyryanka, and often strive stubbornly for this. Such marriages of Zyryanka women, even with Samoyeds, are quite common. The only exception are the Ostyaks, the marriage of Zyryanka with whom is a completely isolated phenomenon. The reason for this lies in the forms of family life among the Ostyaks that are completely unacceptable for Zyryans, determined by the firmly preserved clan system and the painful restrictions imposed by the latter on a woman. Let us cite the following fact as a typical illustration. During the civil war, when the region was partially affected by the Kolchak front, one Zyryanka married an Ostyak, and this marriage was carried out by means of escape. Her father offered a ransom for her in the amount of 50 deer queens, which at that time was a fortune. Having married, the zyryanka begins a new life. Although she runs the entire household, helps her husband, and often independently performs all agricultural work, until complete equality in relations between mu press and wife far away. If, in general, family relations are relatively mild, the husband is still the head of the house, and everyday life gives him the right to teach his wife, right up to teaching with a hand or a club. And if, unfortunately, the husband loves to drink and has a cruel disposition, then the situation of the zyryanka changes dramatically for the worse. It should be noted, however, that such facts are isolated phenomena. The inequality of a woman in rights with a man manifested itself especially sharply in pre-revolutionary times only in her almost complete isolation from public life. This participation existed among Zyryanka only in the form of personal influence on their husbands. Some way out for the highly developed social instincts of the Zyryanka was the organization of a kind of female community around the baths, which the Zyryans took over from the Russians and became extremely widespread in Zyryan everyday life. These peculiar pre-revolutionary "clubs" knew special women's days, when the entire female population came together not only to wash, but mainly to talk, and the main topics of conversation were, of course, topical events. At these meetings, the Zyryan women received some social skills and at them a woman's attitude to certain facts or persons of the village community was formulated, which was of no small importance for the whole village. As for the everyday life, the working life of a Zyryan woman, we have already talked about it. She accounts for all the housework, helping her husband in agriculture, or even independently running an agricultural economy, and all the worries of raising children. These few words embrace the enormous deception of work, which allows her only with difficulty to snatch a few free minutes a day, and sometimes deprives her of any rest except a few hours of sleep. 2. Zyryansk swing. The attitude of children to their parents is somewhat patriarchal. In any case, until his death, the father retains the dominant position in the family, and the children in almost everything obey him, unless, of course, they are allocated to an independent household or the father does not lose the ability to lead the house due to decrepitude and weakness. The mother also retains the care and respect of her children to death. We have tried to give a brief outline of the life of the pre-revolutionary zyryanka. Of course, there are many individual differences due to both the degree of material security and some local characteristics. The richer the Zyrian, the closer his household approaches the kulak type, the more freedom his wife gets. She, naturally, gets great opportunities for development, sometimes degenerating, however, into despotism, unless the head of the family warned her in this regard. On the other hand, the wife of a poor man finds herself in extremely difficult conditions, under which, for example, she has to, in addition to housework, work at the fist, enduring cruel exploitation, nagging, and oppression from the owners. Let us note the Izhemsky, which plays in the region the same role that is attributed to Yaroslavsky in Great Russia. Izhem-tsy — industrialists and merchants — are distinguished by the greatest entrepreneurial spirit, however, somewhat of a kulak shade, and in any case they represent the most prosperous part of the Zyryan population in the entire region. As for the women in Izhma, they have a peculiar difference from the rest of the female population of the region. The absence of "sit-downs" and the small number of premarital, if not extramarital affairs, explained by the strong influence of the hypocritical morality of the official Russian public and the Old Believers' way of life, earned them the reputation of "moral" women. On the other hand, there is also a certain increase in female enslavement, which is also explained by the influence of the Samoyed ideology, whom the Izhemtsy mercilessly exploit by trading methods and the use of their labor, and by other conditions. In any case, there is a somewhat accentuated, in comparison with other areas, contempt for a woman, in which, for example, she is not even allowed to attend men's gatherings or feasts. Finishing this brief description of the life and living conditions of the pre-revolutionary zyryanka and moving on to the question We consider it necessary to remind the reader once again of some geographical and historical facts reported at the beginning of this brochure about the position of Zyryanskaya women under Soviet rule. This is, firstly, the extreme remoteness of the region from the central industrial and cultural points of our Union and the complete absence of railways that would allow us to establish the necessary economic and cultural ties, and the heavy burden of tsarism, which left a legacy of mistrust and hostility of the oppressed national masses towards the Russians, who appeared to them in truly disgusting forms - a merchant, a factory owner and a police officer. This, as well as a relatively short period of time when the Soviet Union could start systematic work, must be borne in mind when we talk about the achievements of the revolution in the issue of the situation in Zaryanskaya women.
3. Modern zyryanka
When we spoke above about the freedom enjoyed by the Zyrian woman in the family and society, it was necessary, of course, to emphasize the very relative nature of this freedom. The latter, mainly, manifests itself in the personal relationships of a woman, unfolding in the circle and within the family. Until the woman is completely emancipated, there is still a "huge distance" from here. The main whales of women's inequality, still sanctified by legal norms and public opinion even in "cultural" Europe, not to mention tsarist Russia, are, of course, the economic insecurity of a woman who is materially dependent on men, and the exclusion of women from broad social work. pre-conditioned by the worse, in comparison with the male, female education. Since one of the greatest achievements of our great revolution is precisely the declaration of women's full rights, and since work among the women of the Union comes up against the need to overcome the inertia and inertia of millennial traditions that fetter women's labor and women's initiative, the tasks set by the revolution cannot be considered solved until the final approval in everyday life and in the public consciousness of the complete economic independence of women's labor and the need for a woman's political and educational education, which allows her to take real participation in public life on an equal basis with a man. for its emancipation and the presence of significant obstacles standing in this way. Among these obstacles, one should first of all note the rather active opposition of the male half of the population, especially its kulak elite. If sometimes the matter is limited to only passive an attitude that often takes on the character of a mockery (“where do we have a woman's mind to live”, “what can a woman understand in public affairs”), one can also note a number of cases when the question of women's participation, for example, in elected bodies, took acute forms. In Kaigorodok, for example, men demanded that women leave the electoral meeting, threatening to leave themselves otherwise. It must be said, however, that such phenomena were relatively rare, and as a result of long and persistent work of an agitational and political propaganda nature, they can be considered almost obsolete. But if active resistance on the part of the male population can be considered relatively not very dangerous, there is its passivity, paralyzing the energy of individual workers or women workers in the region and spreading its pernicious influence in some cases even on the psychology of the weakest and morally unstable party elements But not to mention the resistance of the male half of the population, the workers of the women's movement in the region have to deal with the inertia of women themselves. A number of cases have been registered when women nominated women nominated by women at election meetings to village councils and district councils failed. Meanwhile, where women were organized (for example, in Derevyansk), it was possible to get women candidates, although they were at the bottom of the list. It is interesting to note that in this case the male part of the population also responded very conciliatoryly to the election (“Anna is a sensible woman, let her be on the council”). Enormous difficulties also stand in the way of the correct organization of women's activity. The most active, of course, is the proletarian part of the female population, from among whom the most energetic women activists are recruited. Planned work activities among women are concentrated, as elsewhere in the USSR, mainly around the women's departments of the Communist Party and their local apparatuses. Where they do not exist, the role of communist cells or cells of the Komsomol is highlighted, which also independently carries out a lot of work among female youth. In addition, work among women in the field very often takes place in cooperatives, at schools, self-help committees and other public organizations. Turning to the question of the work of the women's department, it should be noted the difficulties it experiences in relation to the acute lack of qualified workers who are well acquainted with local conditions. ... The result of this deficiency is a rather strong turnover of personnel, which inhibits the scope and proper pace of work. In order to overcome this deficiency, the regional party school accepts a significant (up to 35%) percentage of women who are specially assigned to lead work activities among women. The second and also a very large obstacle is the lack of roads and sparsely populated areas, which require a large cadre of workers in view of the fact that villages, as we have noted, lie tens and even hundreds of kilometers from each other. Nevertheless, these serious objective obstacles were overcome both by the spontaneous urge of the female masses to fight for a better future, and by the exclusive energy of individual pioneers, and mainly pioneers of the women's movement, and the region The ny conference of peasant women, held on September 20, 1926, could already state the unconditional success of the work and its unswerving desire to develop in depth and breadth. Here are the numbers to prove it. For three years - 1924, 1925 and 1926 - the number of delegates consistently gave - 586, 1380 and 2058 people, the number of meetings - 18, 44 and 70. Women's promotion, internship during the same years is expressed in 80, 195 and 613 people. Yasel — 16, 31 and 53. These, as well as other figures, clearly testify to the tremendous shift that has taken place in the consciousness of the female population in the region and is the result of that grandiose reorganization of life on a new basis, which the October Revolution brought with it. We have already noted above that the main tasks of work among women are, firstly, political and educational activities, which determine the everyday emancipation of women and her participation in social construction, and measures for economic support, which first put a real foundation underneath. The main apparatus of the women's department serving the first part of the task is the corps of delegates. The latter represent the most active part of the female population, and, receiving the necessary explanations and guiding instructions at delegate meetings, they spread the seeds of a new public and calls for action in the most deaf cells. The heads of these delegate apparatus in the localities are the volost organizers, which are currently available. almost all over the region, and meetings are held at communal and Komsomol cells, where there are no party organizations (attendance is about 70%). In addition to the delegate corps, work on the political and educational education of the Zyryan woman is carried out at special courses held in the regional and district centers. In order to note the impact of these courses, we emphasize the following characteristic fact. After listening to the Izhma courses, one delegate not only entered the party, but also dragged her husband into it, having managed to convince and re-educate him. The centers of educational programs are working, although it should be noted that the percentage of graduates who graduate from studies is relatively weak. In the appendix, we will provide an overview of the real achievements of this tremendous political education work carried out by the County Women's Department and digitally indicate the participation of women in public activities. For now, we note that the total% of girls in grade I and II schools is 25%, i.e. almost twice the pre-revolutionary norm of female education. On the issue of ensuring the economic conditions in the market, the women's department should note the desire to mechanize women's labor and thus free a woman from the extra burden that does not allow her to devote enough time to real participation in public life. In this regard, one should welcome the energy of the women workers in the distribution of flax crumbs in the field, for the labor of processing flax, which has become very widespread in the region, the work entirely on the woman is greatly facilitated. In exactly the same way, it is necessary to highlight the transition to the management of the women's department of a whole series of women's artels, spontaneously organized, but due to the lack of proper leadership, who fell into disarray. In artels, consisting almost exclusively of the poor peasant element, there are over 130 handicrafts working on orders from Gostorg, Khleboprodukt and cooperation and engaged in the production of malitsa, pim and. etc. and processing of skins. Although their development is still insignificant (the Gamsk artel, for example, in 1926 worked out for 83 rubles. 65 k., Or 3 rubles. 80 k. On average for a member), but the proper leadership, and from 1926 it passed to the women's department - under the available conditions, it will give up to 110 rubles. earnings per member, which represents a significant local income. The Zhenotdel is also conducting intensive campaigning work for the cooperation of women, which will undoubtedly give, and even give already, tangible results in the Zyryanka's home budget, and takes an active part in the work of the health department, which is opening more and more nurseries and playgrounds. The latter, of course, is of tremendous importance not only in relation to the hygienic and sanitary care of the child, but also allows the mother to save the necessary time to participate in public work. Throughout Sysolsky uezd, circles of intercessors were organized, protecting the interests of the female labor population. Although this movement has not yet spread throughout the region, a start has already been made. All over the region, women take part in the work of the people's courts as jurors. The total number (550 people, or 20%) still far from corresponds to the actual ratio between men's and women's cases in the courts. However, if we take into account that these are the first experiments and that the consciousness of their social rights, duties and opportunities very slowly penetrates the consciousness of the female population, obscured by the old way of life and pre-revolutionary and lawlessness - this must be recognized as a great achievement. We have at our disposal a number of figures and facts illustrating the results of the tremendous work done to educate the working zyryanka. Maybe there were flaws in this work. Maybe some of them are still there. It is impossible not to note the almost complete absence of work among the Samoyed women, heavily exploited by the Zyryan kulaks. Above we indicated a number of objective reasons standing in the way of the emancipation of women and inherited mainly from the bad memory of tsarist Russia. But "facts are stubborn things," Lenin said. And these facts are eloquent. (See Appendix.) In conclusion, let us point out the most pressing problems currently facing the women's movement and the women's department organizing it. This is, firstly, the task of intensified struggle against the Zyryan kulaks, in particular, intensified work among the Samoyed women, who are mercilessly exploited by them. Secondly, it is the need to intensify anti-religious propaganda and the struggle against the church, which is still very strong in the region, especially where there are stubborn Old Believer deviations and where even young people fall under its influence. Thirdly, this is the strengthening of work in the artels and the establishment of the correct organization of their management, further collectivization of the labor of farm laborers and their involvement in trade union work. And finally, fourthly, it is active assistance to the economic growth of the region, its industrialization and the construction of railways, which should lead to a powerful economic prosperity, in particular, the proper exploitation of forest resources, and certainly not for the predators of British capitalism and its white-bandit henchmen, but for the working population of the region, which is part of the great family of the free proletarian association of the allied peoples.