1. General outline of the country
Georgia is a fertile country. It is located on the southern slope of the Caucasus Range, which protects it from the cold northern currents. According to its characteristic features, Georgia can be divided into three different regions: firstly, Western Georgia - Imereti, occupying the basin of the Rion River and bordered by two ridges, the main Caucasian ridge and Suram (Lik), and from the west bounded by the Black Sea. River basin Rion, as it were, makes up a huge triangle, the two sides of which are mountain ranges, and the third is the sea. The climate in Western Georgia is warm subtropical, rainfall is abundant, and therefore it is covered everywhere with luxurious vegetation, from the very sea level, right down to the strip of eternal snow. The second region of Georgia is the upper basin of the Kura-Kartal'inia, which is separated from Western Georgia by the Lik mountain range and the Adjara-Akhaltsiysky mountains. In this region, the climate is less warm and the precipitation is less abundant, and therefore the flora does not amaze him as much as in Western Georgia. However, the vegetation is extremely rich here too. Beautiful maple, beech, coniferous forests cover the slopes of the mountains, vines, fruit trees, etc. grow in the valleys, etc. The third region is the Kakheti region, lying to the east of Kartalinia. It is extremely rich and in many ways resembles Western Georgia in its vegetation. All these areas are in close proximity to the main Caucasian ridge and currently serve as a center for the spread of the Georgian people. However, there were times when Georgian tribes inhabited areas lying far to the south, up to the Araks and even beyond. The past of the Georgian people goes back extremely far. The names of individual Georgian tribes are found in ancient Assyrian inscriptions and chronicles already one and a half thousand years BC, as well as in the Bible. However, the history of the Georgian tribes of these distant centuries is still shrouded in darkness. The only thing we can say with certainty is that the roots of Georgian culture go back to the so-called Kingdom of Van (1000-600 BC) and that the people who inhabited this kingdom, the Khaldi, are one of the constituent parts that created the modern Georgian nationality. Georgian history can be divided into three periods. The mythical period was reflected in the Georgian annals. In the latter, it is muffled about some kind of struggle waged by the founder of Georgia, Kartlos, with Nemrod, who apparently personified the Assyrians. Another period can be called an epic period, since the information about it reported by the Georgian chronicles (Kartlis Tskhovreba) is definitely epic in nature. This period lasts approximately from the IV century BC up to the Arab conquest (VII century AD). For this period, there is already sufficient information for Georgia, found in classical authors. The third period — the period after the Arab conquest — can rightfully be called the historical period. What kind of life and social order was typical for Georgia and the Georgian tribes of these different periods? For the first period, the mythical period, we have almost no data yet. In the second period, the period from the IV century BC, apparently, the patriarchal-tribal system prevailed at the beginning, which gradually in the first centuries of our era began to give way to the feudal system and life. The historical period up to the revolution of 1905 was characterized by a feudal system. Georgian feudalism reached its development in the XII and XIII centuries in the so-called era of Queen Tamara. After the Mongol conquest (XIII century), regress was definitely noticed in Georgia, and Georgian feudalism of subsequent centuries could be called decadent feudalism. However, this decadent feudalism, which led the country to complete fragmentation, continued until the 19th century, until Russian rule. The Russian government was afraid of large feudal lords, so it strongly supported the small landed nobility, which equalized in rights with the land magnates. Thus, the Russian government destroyed the feudal hierarchy and in its place left only two classes, the noble-landowner class, which owned land, and the Yrestyan class, deprived of independent land holdings. The feudal hierarchy ceased to exist under Russian rule, while the relationship between peasants and landowners continued to be purely feudal in nature, right up to the present day, until the revolution of 1905, and in survivals until the October Revolution. The peasant remained associated with a number of duties with the landowner, he did not own his own land plots, but cultivated only the landowner's land, giving the owner for the right to use a certain part of the harvest, called "tala" and sometimes making up a third or a quarter of the total harvest. True, in Western Georgia, excessively proliferating noble families often turned into purely peasant holdings in their land holdings, but along with this, medium and large landowners continued to exist. Georgia is a predominantly agricultural country; agriculture plays in it completely an exceptional role, and the industry is still very weak. Only the manganese mines of Western Georgia are of great importance, and not only all-Union, but also worldwide. The manufacturing industry (tobacco and textile factories, winemaking) is still underdeveloped. Only after carrying out large-scale electrification works in Georgia was the development of its natural resources ensured. As for the merchant class, oddly enough, the Georgians during their very long history did not single out one, especially in Eastern Georgia, and the merchants in general were represented by a foreign element, mainly Armenians. True, a significant part of the Armenian form class in Georgia settled a very long time ago, and therefore completely georgianized. Nevertheless, one cannot fail to note the phenomenon; that in; Until the 20th century, Georgia did not generally have a national trading class. This circumstance is extremely characteristic and it definitely indicates the role that the agricultural economy plays in Georgia, as well as the importance of the feudal system for Georgian life. The relationship between the feudal landlord and the peasant-farmer found an extremely vivid reflection in Georgian life and had a profound influence right up to our days, when the victorious revolution crushed all foundations. previous relationship. As for the proletariat, it is quantitatively small in Georgia. It is available only in a few centers and is represented mainly by transport workers. Thus, the most numerous category of workers is the workers of the Tiflis railway workshops. If we add to them some more workers employed in tobacco factories, Chiatura manganese mines and Tkvibul coal mines, several leather factories, as well as port workers in Batum and Poti, then we will get only 10-15 thousand workers for the whole of Georgia. But the small-scale trade and handicraft class of Georgia is much stronger. However, here it is necessary to repeat what has just been said — the trade and handicraft class of the most important centers of Eastern Georgia, primarily in Tiflis, consists of more than half of Armenians, although to a large extent they have become Georgian and adopted the Georgian way of life. These are, in general, the class divisions of modern Georgia, or rather, pre-revolutionary Georgia. Turning to the position of a woman, it should be pointed out that in general, in most of Georgia, a Georgian woman seems to be completely free and equal to a man. Unlike other eastern countries, it is not constrained by everyday life or custom. However, this is not true for all regions of Georgia, and above all, the regions populated by Georgians professing Islam are an exception. These, by the way, include Ajaristan, and some areas that have become part of Turkey. The life of some corners of Georgia, lost in the depths of the main Caucasian ridge, where old traditions have been preserved in full force and where the position of a woman is influenced by customs dating back to the deepest antiquity, seems to be very characteristic. In these corners you can find the remnants of everyday life dating back to the deepest past in which there was no individual marriage, such, for example, the corner is Svane-tmya, inhabited, however, not by Georgians, but by the Svans, kindred to Georgians. it is located between two parallel ridges: the main Caucasian ridge, which reaches its largest here! heights, and the Latparsky ridge parallel to it. Svaneti lies in the middle of these two ridges. It is extremely difficult to get into it, since the snow makes the passes of the Latparsky ridge impassable for eight months a year. As for the passes of the main Caucasian ridge, they can be used only in July and August. Svaneti, which is difficult to access, from the artistic point of view, seems to be an exceptional beauty spot, especially when you look at it from the top of the Latpar ridge. Then the gorges of Svaneti stand in front of the beholder at a glance. Below, along the rapid course of the Ingur River, there are marvelous forests that rise up to the Alpine strip. Then a black, completely bare rocky ridge, stretching down to a strip of eternal snow and cut only by glaciers descending from the main massif of the main ridge, and then a huge white wall of eternal snow with huge snow plains rises, on which individual peaks rise. In the morning, at sunrise, the picture becomes completely fabulous. At first, individual peaks turn pink, and the main mass of snow remains bluish-white until * the moment when the sun's rays do not illuminate individual gorges. Svaneti is a fabulous country, but life in this fabulous country is extremely difficult, which left its mark on the inhabitants. In general, they are gloomy and inhospitable. In addition, they constantly 'had to defend their existence from all kinds of attacks, and' the Svan villages present a very special picture. Approximately, each of the three houses has a tall, tapering tower topped with a quadrangular ledge. This tower is divided into floors, which are communicate with each other using holes made in the floor and portable wooden ladders. In addition, some of the villages of the so-called Free Svaneti (in contrast to the Princely Svaneti) are surrounded by a special wall. At present, the Svans represent only a remnant of the once vast ethnic group, akin to the Georgians and driven into inaccessible mountains; as we will see later, they preserved a special way of life, which affected the position of women. Another extremely difficult-to-reach corner of Georgia is Khevsureti, lying far to the east to the north of Tiflis. Get in! in Khevsureti, as well as in Svaneti, it is extremely difficult. Only mountain paths, cut by horse hooves in the rocks, going over deep abysses, lead to Khevsurst. It is almost impossible for a person not accustomed to mountain travel to get to Khevsureti. The newcomer is especially horrified by the bridges thrown over mountain streams that have dug deep gorges, often reaching depths of up to 100 sazhens, and 20-30 fathoms wide. These bridges are usually made of parallel logs, on which boards are crushed. These boards are attached to the logs with a vine through specially made holes. Often, when the abyss over which the bridge is thrown is wide enough, each of the parallel sides consists of two logs fastened together in an equally primitive way. When a rider enters such a bridge, the logs begin to sway, and each board begins to dance under the horse's feet, and all this is over the abyss 100 yards deep. It is absolutely impossible for beginners to find their way on the paths of Khevsureti. During my first trip to Khevsureti, I somehow drove far ahead of my companions along a path that wound over huge abysses along the slope of an almost sheer cliff. To my horror, at one of the turns, I saw the Khevsurs driving towards me. I had no idea how to turn, the Khevsurs who were driving towards me were shouting something, when they were convinced that I did not understand them and were completely confused, then each of the riders stood with one foot on the saddle, raised the other as high as possible, leaning on the rock , then he reared the horse, held it under his foot and thus turned, having done all the ego over the bottomless abyss; then the whole cavalcade descended to a wider place, where it let me and my companions pass. It is in such inaccessible areas that the Khevsurs live. Khevsur villages also present an extremely interesting picture. Khevsureti is almost completely devoid of flat places, and therefore its villages are molded along the slopes of the mountains with a number of floors. The roof of the lowest hut (sakli) serves as a courtyard for the hut located above, and with such steps the village sometimes goes up to a large elevation. sotu, seven-eight-nine steps. Khevsureti is an extremely poor country, its inhabitants are mainly engaged in cattle breeding, but nevertheless; the Khevsurs are extremely welcoming and hospitable. ' However, despite the cordiality and hospitality, the Khevsurs retained quite a few barbaric customs (as well as the Svans), among other things, the custom of bloody revenge. Therefore, in Khevsureti one can sometimes see a very curious picture: the Khevsur is cultivating his field fully armed, the weapon of the Khevsur is "extremely primitive and consists, or rather consisted" more recently of chain mail, helmet, sword, as well as an archaic flintlock rifle with a tiny butt and with a long barrel ... A shot from such a gun will certainly knock an unusual person off his feet x) Pshavia and the area inhabited by carcasses seem to be the same bearish angles. For the latter, it must be pointed out that they predominantly retained a typical 'nomadic way of life: the carcasses annually drive their herds over great distances up to Turkey. In this respect, this phenomenon seems to be extremely characteristic. In Georgia, cattle breeding plays an important role in many regions, however, almost everywhere, it still plays an auxiliary role and has lost the character of a nomadic economy. The Tushins in this case are an exception. Needless to say, in all the indicated regions of Svaneti, Khevsureti, Pshavia and Tusheti, a lot of ancient customs and beliefs have been preserved. Christianity has touched these areas very superficially, and under a slight touch it is easy to discern the pagan basis of different beliefs. This circumstance seems all the more remarkable since Georgia adopted Christianity already in the 4th century. ad. True, at the present time, among Georgians, like among Armenians, religion has receded into the background and is most likely a matter of habit. Nevertheless, it should be noted that in various hard-to-reach areas, Christianity could not even break the more ancient beliefs. In this respect, Islam, adopted in some Georgian regions, had a much deeper effect and, by the way, religious fanaticism can be found only in Muslim Georgia. Before the Russian rule, Georgia had an independent church organization headed by a Catholic (patriarch). The Russian government destroyed the Georgian independent organization and subordinated the Georgian Church to the synod, which always caused extreme discontent in certain Georgian circles. After the revolution of 1917, the Georgian church I regained independence, autocephaly. Oddly enough, the idea of ​​an independent church organization was especially strongly worn in 17-21, not by the clergy, but by the Georgian Mensheviks. As for the Georgian peasant economy, its distinctive feature is little land. Land plots are especially small in Western Georgia (Imeretin), where the population is relatively extremely dense, up to 50 people. per sq. verst, and the percentage of the urban population is no more than 15о / о of the total population. In Central Georgia, Kartalinii and Kakheti, the land plots are somewhat larger, but nevertheless they are completely insufficient, and therefore everywhere there is a striving for intensive crops, which, moreover, are extremely favored by natural conditions. Horticulture and viticulture are widespread in Georgia. In some areas, they are engaged in cotton growing, as well as the cultivation of exotic crops (tea bush, laurel cherry, etc.). Arable farming 'gained considerable dimensions in Kartalinia. In Western Georgia (Imeretin), they are mainly engaged in the cultivation of corn. In the mountainous regions and in Tusheti, cattle breeding is of great importance. The difference in the peasant economy did not specifically affect the position of the Georgian woman. Everywhere in the cultural regions of Georgia, she enjoys complete freedom in legal and domestic terms. Her main occupation is, of course, the household. The Georgian woman takes only an insignificant part in heavy agricultural work, and often in the fields you can find women and girls working in gloves. Until very recently, before the revolution, the Georgian social system and the strict demarcation of the rural population of Georgia into two hostile classes: landlords and peasants, exerted a much greater influence on the position of women. However, the victorious revolution, which crushed the landlord rule, destroyed this influence. The history of the Georgian social and revolutionary movement over the past fifty years is presented in general terms as follows: in Georgia the class division was manifested extremely clearly, especially in the countryside. Agrarian movements were observed in Georgia throughout the 19th century. In the first decades of Russian domination, and also soon after the end of the Crimean campaign, these unrest reached particular intensity in western Georgia — in Mingrelia. However, these movements were predominantly spontaneous. They were realized only in the 90s. last century under the influence of the Marxist! teachings. The idea of ​​the class struggle was extremely easily assimilated by the Georgian peasants, and therefore, strange as it may seem at first glance, the social democratic movement took deep roots in the Georgian peasantry, and very quickly (especially after the revolution of 1905-6) showed petty-bourgeois tendencies. This phenomenon is quite understandable. The proletariat in Georgia is very weak. Its intelligentsia consists mainly of commoners and small-scale nobles. The contradictions that were observed in the countryside and were definitely reduced to the struggle between the landowners and peasants led to the rapid spread of the idea of ​​the class struggle. At the same time, the Georgian city, inhabited largely by artisans and small traders, experienced an acute crisis, namely the transition from a semi-medieval guild to a capitalist economy. This transition had a very difficult impact on the handicraft and small-scale merchant urban population, and therefore the revolutionary slogans of 1905 spread easily in it. primarily against the police autocracy that takes care of it. However, the sources of this hatred of capitalism here were different from those of the organized proletariat, which was fully revealed after the fall of the autocracy, when power in Georgia passed into the hands of the party, which at that time enjoyed the greatest influence among the population as a result of its revolutionary activities in 1905. to the Mensheviks. From the moment when the Georgian Mensheviks were given the opportunity to pursue their policy freely, it became clear that, despite all the socialist slogans they once put forward, they turned out to be first and foremost ardent nationalists. The Georgian Mensheviks began with a nationalist policy and with the persecution of various national minorities, Armenians, Russians, Ossetians, etc. The nationalist policy of the Georgian Mensheviks led to a series of bloody clashes, as well as to a certain currying favor with the imperialists. In 1918, the Georgian Mensheviks, first of all, under the auspices of German imperialism, showed themselves to be Germanophiles, that is, ardent supporters of imperialist Germany, despite the fact that before the February revolution of 1917, the leaders of the Georgian Mensheviks, Noy Zhordania, Chkheidze, Yevgeny Gegechkori, were distinguished by their defensist tendencies. Germanophilism of the Georgian Mensh After the defeat of Germany, the Eviks did not prevent them from showing ardent sympathy for the Entente, in particular for Great Britain, which for a short time occupied the entire Transcaucasia. In the area of ​​social construction, the Georgian Mensheviks provided the greatest patronage to local capitalist groups, and therefore their economic policy was strictly protectionist (that is, patronizing the native bourgeoisie). The tendencies manifested by the Mensheviks cannot surprise the attentive observer, since in essence in Georgia the Mensheviks have always relied on the bourgeois urban masses and on the peasantry. The absence of large proletarian masses led to the triumph of the petty-bourgeois nationalist policy in Georgia. The Georgian Mensheviks ruled Georgia for four years in 1917-1921. The fall of the Menshevik regime took place in February 1921.
2. The woman of Georgia before the Soviet regime
Moving on to the position of a Georgian woman, it is necessary, first of all, to note the sharp line that separates a Georgian city dweller from a Georgian peasant woman. A Georgian city dweller who has lived a common life with Russia for more than a century has become so Europeanized that she is almost indistinguishable from a Russian city dweller. “She also studies in secondary and higher educational institutions, is engaged in medicine, law, teaching and research, lives and works in the same social and labor conditions, not differing in any way from a Russian city dweller. Therefore, in this essay we mean a Georgian peasant woman , especially a Georgian woman in the remote corners of Georgia. Under the general name of a Georgian one should understand not only the women of Georgia proper (Imeretin, Kartalinia, Kakheti), but also Khevsureti, Pshavia, Tu-shetia, Svaneti, etc. Only the woman of Adjara stands somewhat apart True, in ethnological terms, the Adjarians are the same Georgians-Kartvelians as the closely related Gurians.However, the four-century rule of Turkey (from the 16th to the second half of the 19th century) radically changed the entire social structure of the Ajarians, instilled in them Islam and Turkic not only their way of life, but to a large extent even their language.The position of the Adjarian woman, thanks to this, before the October Revolution, was extremely similar to that of placement of women in other Muslim countries, for example, in Turkey. In view of this peculiar 'provision of the .jarka, it is not considered in this article. As for the woman of Abkhazia, she cannot be considered here, since the Abkhaz are not Kartvelians and in terms of language, social structure and way of life are extremely close to the neighboring mountain tribes of the Circassians - (Adyge). The same applies to the women of another people inhabiting multinational Georgia, namely to the Ossetians of the Goriyoki district (in the south of Ossetia). Naturally, depending on the surrounding nature, on how the historical and socio-economic destinies of one or more another tribe inhabiting the mountains and valleys of Georgia, the character of a woman was formed, her role and significance in the family and society was established.The position of a Georgian woman in Georgia proper, understanding by this name, as already mentioned, Kakheti, Kartalinia, Imereti and Guria, is significantly different from the position of such in the rest of the East. First of all, it is necessary to note the relatively high level of culture of the population of Georgia, especially in its western part, where literacy reaches almost 5Oy / o. True, the percentage of literate women is lower than the percentage of literate men, nevertheless, it is several times higher than the percentage of literacy in any eastern country. For a hundred years of Russian power in Georgia, the normalization of marriage, property, etc., has been firmly established. no difference in this respect between the position of the Georgian peasant woman and the Russian one living on the territory of the RSFSR. In everyday life, in the sense of customary law, the position of a Georgian woman is even better than that of a Russian woman: she is more independent and freer than a Russian woman. Among a number of reasons that determined the everyday life of a Georgian woman and shaped her character, one should be pointed out, undoubtedly the most important: this reason is permanent wars , during which the men were beaten, and the surviving women, inevitably began to play a large role in the family and in public life. Indeed, if you glance at the history of Georgia, it is easy to see that almost throughout its entire length it is filled with endless wars and bloody invasions. From the IV century. , before our era, Georgia had to literally continuously wage wars or experience invasions from Arabs, Byzantines, Turks, Mongols, mountain tribes, etc. ad infinitum. Suffice it to point out that in 1795 Georgia was completely devastated by the Persians who turned Tiflis into a heap of ashes, and brought out tens of thousands of inhabitants. After this invasion Georgia was forced to turn to Russia for help, which took this opportunity to annex all of its territory. that during such a long period of devastation and invasions, a Georgian woman, being left without a man, emancipated, grew up and got stronger spiritually, acquired certain skills, certain character traits. It is not for nothing that the golden age of Georgia is considered to be the reign of the woman, Queen Tamara, who reigned in the XII century. along with a man, a Georgian woman, as we noted, does not feel the humiliation and dependence that a Turkic and even an Armenian woman feels. She does not wrap herself in a veil, does not hide her face; at home, at a party, at festive gatherings, she behaves with dignity. It should be especially emphasized one trait characteristic of a Georgian woman - innate politeness, friendliness, extraordinary, purely Georgian affection. While talking, she constantly calls her interlocutor or interlocutor with hard-to-translate affectionate names, the approximate meaning of which is "my dear", "my beloved." faithful, curious, full of sympathy For someone else's grief. In the event that a misfortune visits her own family and someone close to her dies, no matter how poor the family is, she considers it her duty to arrange a magnificent funeral and no less magnificent commemoration. During the funeral, Georgian women wail and loudly mourn the deceased. Until very recently, it was customary to invite special "mourners" who, for a special fee, took upon themselves the responsibility of lamenting and wailing. The Georgian woman likes to have fun, laugh, dance; and she is a great dancer. In summer, when a quiet, clear evening descends on the mountains and valleys, shrouds gardens and vineyards in a light haze, when bright stars shine in the warm sky, you can watch dancing and games in the Georgian village. Young people gather somewhere on the site, sometimes under the hay of an old round tower, stand in a circle and, to the sound of a big tambourine (daira), beat their hands in time (tashi); the dancer enters the circle, becomes beautiful, Rice. 1. The Georgian Military Road and the Maiden Tower near Mtskheta. A proud pose, and a free, lively, plastic dance begins; slender, dexterous, with arms outstretched, on which the wide sleeves of a Circassian fall, he resembles a beautiful bird of prey outlining its prey. After making several circles, he invites his partner with a slight nod of his head. Coming out of the crowd, throwing IN! sides of the hand, she stands in front of the gentleman and, often turning over with her legs, smoothly rushes in a circle. You cannot admire the light, plastic figure of a Georgian woman without admiration, when, with beautifully curved arms, full of inexpressible femininity, she smoothly rushes away from the dancer, and he, as if amusing himself admiring his strength and dexterity, whirls around her, overtakes and is about to grab the opened wings with hands. For those who have not seen this ancient beautiful dance of Georgia in such an environment, it is difficult to tell what a magical sight a crowd illuminated by the light of the moon is like, standing in the right circle and rhythmically clapping its hands to the cheerful sounds of daira, the dancers themselves, slender, light, beautiful and at ease fluttering in a circle. And all around is a fabulously beautiful night, warm, southern, silvery moonlight, illuminating the mountains of the mountains, the whole Georgian village in the gardens and vineyards. The life of a Georgian mountain woman was completely different: Khevsurki, Pshavka and Svanki.

Khevsurk
The Khevsurs, as already mentioned, live in the gorges of the Main Caucasian ridge. In view of the low accessibility of the region inhabited by the Khevsurs, it was previously difficult to establish an exact figure for the population; The 1926 census gives a figure of 3.564 people, which proves the fact of the gradual extinction of the population, since the travelers who visited Khevsureti in the 80s and 90s. determined their number at 6.000 people. The primitiveness of the social system and material culture of the Khevsurs has already been noted above. This circumstance naturally determines the specific position of the Khevsurian woman. Khevsurka also holds herself with dignity, in her gaze and movements one can feel self-confidence. Khevsurks are usually beautiful, slender, tall; among them there are often blondes and redheads with blue eyes. The names of the Khevsurian women are interesting: Mzia (sun), Mzekala, (sunny woman), Natula, Nanuka, Mamida, Dzila, Shukia. They dress in woolen, heavy dark-colored dresses, beautifully embroidered with colored threads and small buttons. On their heads, girls wear something like a low kokoshnik embroidered with beads, married women, in addition, a headdress (mandili). In the summer of 1927 I participated in the first expedition sent by the Scientific Association of Oriental Studies at the Central Executive Committee of the USSR to Khevsureti and headed by V.A. Kryazhin. During our stay in Khevsureti, we many times had to observe how the Khevsur women were free and at ease, entering into the conversation of men, joking and laughing merrily. However, when we sat down to eat, only men gathered around the table; the women remained at the hearth, where they prepared food. Serving any food or dishes, the women stopped three steps from the table and passed what was in their hands to the owner of the house, who set the item on the table. The Khevsur still has an interesting custom, (Testifying of extraordinary respect, (Who is used by a woman, and who is a re-reader of the ancient era of women's domination in social organization, the so-called "matriarchy." The protection of the honor of a woman lies with the whole society. Whoever has kidnapped a woman or a girl of his society is considered to have committed a crime against society and must be expelled from his native environment; even his cattle cannot graze together about the rural cattle. If such a guilty person wants to be reconciled with society, he must donate the cauldron and the silver bowl, slaughter the bull and brew beer. It should be noted that the abduction of women with the use of violence was practiced in relatively distant times. The kidnapping gradually lost its original character and in the subsequent her time the abduction was usually carried out with the consent of the abducted person. However, only the abduction of girls and, moreover, non-betrothed ones was allowed. For the kidnapping of a betrothed girl, a fine was imposed. The kidnapping of a married woman was a great crime and was usually punishable by death. Doctor N. A. Khudadov, in his monograph "Khev-Suretia", tells an interesting episode connected with the abduction of a girl, which he witnessed. The kidnapped girl was betrothed; the groom, having established who the abductor was, began to persecute the family members of the offender and declared that he would avenge the offense with death. Representatives of the Russian authorities intervened and summoned both sides for interrogation. NA Khudadov describes the moment when the parties appeared in a public place and the analysis of the case. The groom, a young handsome Khevsur, with energetic features, appeared in full armor: chain mail, helmet, armor, sword and shield. The abductors did not confess to the abduction, while the groom claimed that the girl had been abducted, and in the presence of the authorities calmly announced that he would kill the offender. In view of the fact that the girl in question was apparently 'intimidated and afraid to expose the kidnappers, it was decided, to the pleasure of the groom, to return her to her father, even if the kidnapped girl was an un-betrothed girl to the kidnapper, before marrying her. it was necessary to reconcile with her family, otherwise the abduction would lose its force and it was not allowed to marry the abducted. Later, along with the abduction, intermediaries appear: matchmakers and matchmakers who go to the bride's house, usually carrying an Abaz (20 kopecks . coin) or some thing of the same value as a sign of engagement. In addition, vodka and chintz are brought to the bride's house. After the betrothal, kinship is established and maintained between the homes of the betrothed. The betrothed, as we have seen, cannot be kidnapped or given in marriage to another ', since in this case the case may come to the murder of the offender or the fine of the guilty person in the amount of 16-30 cows. Along with Christians, marriage takes place either according to a pagan rite or according to a Christian. Marriage, as mentioned above, is preceded by matchmaking, which in other cases begins in the childhood of the bride and groom. The matchmaker who comes to the bride's house informs about the sender's proposal. If the girl's father agrees, the matchmaker immediately gives the nishani wedding sign. Some time later, the groom's father with vodka and chintz goes, accompanied by one of the cousins, to the bride's father to make a formal proposal. Then every year he brings vodka and a "pretzel of happiness" to the bride's house. When the groom grows up, his father again goes to the bride's house to come to an agreement on the wedding. Having obtained consent, he returns home and sends two villagers with two rams to the bride's house, one of whom is slaughtered at a revered shrine, and the other in the bride's house. The bride's mother bakes two huge pies, after which all the villagers gather at the girl's house; the bride is dressed up and escorted to the end of the village, where one of the pies is cut. The girl says goodbye to her family and fellow villagers and follows on to the groom's house, accompanied by only a few relatives, who are eating the second pie. The bride arriving at the groom's house is placed with other women on the lower floor, the men are on the upper floor, and the groom hides in another house. The wedding begins with the slaughter of a ram in honor of the saint. Then there is a drinking binge, during which the bridegroom's best man is required to drive the groom. When the latter appears, he is seated in a place of honor and given a glass of vodka. In general, the groom does not take part in the fun. The feast lasts three days, after which the bride's best man goes home, and the groom, along with other relatives, escorts the bride to her father's house. Here, too, they have fun for three days, after which the groom returns home, and weightlessness remains with his relatives for a year. During this time, the groom not only cannot visit his bride, but even visit the village where she lives. A year later, the bride goes to the groom, where the Yafets of the temple (deans) pins the groom's clothes to the bride's dress with a needle, after which the newlyweds are laid on the prepared bed. A common bed is allowed only during the first three days of the NIS, then the young are seen only secretly. This is how the betrothal and wedding usually takes place in Khevsureti. However, other methods of matchmaking have recently been observed. We were told that if a Khevsur touches a girl's shoulders with his hands, she, from that moment on, is considered his bride; if the bridegroom, who has wooed in this way, does not like the bride, she can pay off. In some cases, the Khevsur, bypassing the intermediaries - matchmakers, goes to the match; in this case, if the girl hands him the mandilas, the proposal is considered accepted. We had to meet a young Khevsur who was returning after such a successful match with the bride's headscarf (mandili) on his shoulders. He happily walked along the narrow path of the deaf Argun gorge, returning to his native selenium The husband and wife in the presence of strangers do not look at each other and do not speak among themselves. After the birth of their first child, the life of the spouses goes back to normal. During the first three to four years of married life, it is considered shameful to have children: in a rare family you can see more than three children. The small children of the Khevsurian family are explained by the fact that the Khevsurs are afraid of overpopulation. The lack of land suitable for plowing makes it impossible to develop agriculture and prevents the formation of large settlements. A country inhabited by Khevsurs can only feed a limited number of people, therefore, as soon as the population increases, the surplus should be moved somewhere to neighboring countries. Parents love children, but usually caress them furtively. Mothers in the presence of strangers are ashamed to be gentle with their children. Upbringing in a Khevsurian family is reduced to teaching a child everything that will eventually be needed in life. Accordingly, the girl is taught to take part in all household activities; she is taught to spin, weave, cook dung, which is used as fuel. Khevsurian girls are very chaste. To become pregnant before marriage is considered such a great disgrace that a rare girl is able to survive it. When she marries, a young woman brings her dress with her and “satavo,” that is, dowry, which usually consists of livestock. From childhood, a girl receives a sheep, a calf or a cow from her relatives, and this cattle with offspring constitutes her dowry. Property rights between spouses are strictly delineated. The husband has no right to dispose of his wife's property, just as the wife does not have the right to dispose of her husband's property. The husband cannot, by custom, give anything to his wife from his property or bequeath “anything in case of death. Spouses cannot inherit from each other. After the death of the mother, the sons receive the mother's dowry in equal shares, the dresses of the deceased remain for the daughters. Both husband and wife, in the event of the death of one of them, bury each other at their own expense, if after the deceased there is no property left or there is not enough for the funeral. Heveurka, as we said above, is under the patronage of society, as a result of this the husband is responsible to this society if he mistreats his wife. However, it should be noted that despite the above, the position of the Khevsurian woman is far from being enviable; Khevsur, valuing his freedom, puts most of the work on the shoulders of the woman. The Khevsurka, in addition to doing all the chores around the house, dressing and shoeing her family, reaps, mows and threshes bread on a par with a man. On the very first day of the wedding, the young woman must carry out manure with her own hands, bring firewood, hay, etc. "As for fun, pleasures, she is bypassed here too; during temple holidays the Khevsurka prays from afar, during the big holidays to her it is forbidden to take part in a general conversation; she can only drink beer and go home; she does not take part in food, in a feast. According to the concepts of the Khevsurs, it is indecent for a woman to dance, jump; in the same way, she is ashamed to ride; therefore, usually the Khevsur rides on horseback, on a horse, and a woman, laden with a load, follows him, grabbing the horse's tail. During menstruation or childbirth, the Khevsurka 'is considered unclean and should be in a small building located away from the village and called "samrevl. It is easy to imagine the web, how lonely and unhappy the woman feels sick, especially at night; they do not talk to her, they turn away from her. With the woman in labor, for two weeks from the day of birth, neither men nor women speak, and the dean oz (cleric) for a whole month. Even from her own female sister, a woman in labor cannot wait for help; they only bring food to her, which, without entering Sam-Revlo, is lowered through a hole made in the roof of the dwelling. The famous researcher Dr. Radde, who visited Khevsureti in 1876, describing this custom, says: “Let the readers imagine the position a woman in labor in the area, at an altitude of "7,000 ft. above sea level, when the mountains are covered with deep snow and frost at night often reaches 20 degrees. And at that time a woman has to lie" in a bundle of straw for long nights in complete solitude and without any help. "While the unfortunate, helpless woman, who has resolved herself without any help, while away her days in complete solitude, her husband is on guard on the roof" samrevlo "with a gun in his hand so that the devil does not kill the child. Khevsur husbands consider it quite sufficient to leave a loaded gun to protect the child and thus free themselves from the boring occupation of guarding "samrevlo". Before returning to the house, a woman should bathe, wash her dress and wash all the dishes that were with her. After two weeks after giving birth, the cattle are slaughtered and the house is sprinkled with her blood. Just before the mother's return home, cattle (sheep or calf) are slaughtered for the second time; the blood of the sacrificial animal is collected in a cup and the walls and pillars of the house are sprinkled with this blood; after that, the woman in labor can return home. In the village of Ardoti, in the very depths Bina Khevsure-tii, we had to see a corner saturated with Khevsurian life, against the background of which "samrevlo" made a particularly strong impression. Early in the morning we passed "samrevlo", where after giving birth there was a young Khevsur woman. "Samrevlo" is a small, low ^ building, without windows, made of flat slate slabs, the usual building material here. The woman was sitting at the entrance with a little girl, as it turned out, her sister, who brought her food. A few steps from the samrevlo, on the bushes, a dress of the “unclean” was hung, which was supposed to be ventilated and cleansed. A little further, towards the village, we saw almost the same building of a smaller size, in front of the entrance to which a young shepherd dog lay; the building turned out to be a dog kennel. The extraordinary similarity of these two similar buildings, built of the same material, involuntarily caught the eye. The Khevsurka is not spoiled by her husband's attention; as it was already said, among the Khevsurs it is not customary to show signs of attention and tenderness towards each other; if within three to four years after marriage, the Khevsur woman turns out to be childless, the husband can marry his second wife. It should be noted, however, that such cases are extremely rare. For the introduction of the second wife) into the house, the Khevsur must pay the relatives of the first wife a fine in the amount of five cows. If the wife is a bad worker, childless, sickly, the Khevsur can drive her away; in case the wife is driven out without sufficient reason, the husband must pay her "for marriage" and "for work." Children stay with their husband. The expelled wife can take, with the consent of her husband, only an infant. The father gives one cow, or four sheep, to feed the child. When the child grows up, he returns to his father and lives with him. The Khevsurka can also leave her husband. But in view of the fact that this is the greatest shame for a man, a Khevsur woman who left her husband is obliged to give him the word not to marry another. The one who breaks this vow is in danger of death. This is, in general terms, the position of the Khevsurian woman. The definition of one's position "wiped out between the devils" in the mouth of the Khevsur woman sounds deeply sad and hidden resentment.

Pshavka
We will not dwell on the description of the situation of the Khevsurian neighbor of the Pshav woman, in view of the fact that the life of the Pshavs has much in common with the life of the Khevsur neighbors; True, the comparative proximity of the cultural regions of Georgia and the easy accessibility of Pshavia itself make its cultural and everyday life in many respects different from that of Khevsureti. First of all, the unusually high literacy is striking: in Pshavia there are up to 80 literate people. Pshav's children, according to the testimony of teachers, are distinguished by brilliant abilities, it often happens that when they get to school, they already know how to read and write, since the elders teach the younger ones on the stones with coal. Unfortunately, the field is in the way! work, in view of this academic year lasts only five months. Bloody revenge, which is common in Khevsureti, is extremely rare in Pshavia, and a kind of fine is usually paid for shed blood. The natural differences in comparison with Khevsuretia are accordingly reflected in the position of the Pshav woman. Pshavka, like the Khevsurka, during menstruation or childbirth, is isolated in special rooms, here called "boseli", literally "barn"). During the first prenatal contractions, women in labor are taken to the "bosel", where they spend six weeks; on exit, they are cleansed by wetting the hair with cow urine. However, here these customs are largely relaxed. Keeping such customs, the Pshavs make deviations towards facilitating Their fulfillment: "Boseli" do not necessarily represent a dog kennel, often it is a pantry or an uninhabited room. Just like "the Khevsurka, the Pshavka is forbidden to approach sacred places, be it a pagan" hati "Or an Orthodox church. If a girl does not like the groom, she can refuse him. Pshavoks also have property rights. Pshavian women, especially girls, are unusually beautiful, some of them resemble Ukrainian women.

Svanka
Svans, as it was said, are related to Georgians. They represent the remnants of a once large people. For a very long time they lived separately and in isolation, as a result of which they were almost as primitive as the Khevsurs; they have retained their language, but the majority speaks Georgian as well. The total number has not been established exactly, it is approximately estimated at 22,000 souls. The Svans are a capable and freedom-loving people. A Svan woman is currently taking part in a family relationship on an equal basis with a man; and in public life. She speaks at the rally gakh as freely as a man. In the opposite; in contrast to the Khevsurke, the Svan woman of freedom- '; but dances and sings, moreover, during public festivities, in which both men and women take equal part, the leading role in dancing and singing belongs to the svanke. If at present in Svaneti there are outlined the sprouts of a new life, new relations, a new free and equal the position of women, then in a relatively recent time the position of the svank was much more difficult and dependent ... In view of the natural conditions, scarcity and poverty of life, the svank has to work hard and hard. All the hardships of economic life in Svaneti lie on a woman. She weaves linen and cloth ', sews linen, clothes, knits socks, threshes wheat, bakes bread, drives out cattle to pasture and drives back; in addition, she helps her husband to mow and remove hay, prepare firewood, harvest the field, thresh. In the past, she even fought alongside her husband. All property acquired by the spouses is common property, but the wife has the right to raise livestock and (to have movable property with her parents or relatives, and this property is her exclusive property. In case the husband beats wife, she returns to her parents' house and does not return to her husband until he apologizes to her and her parents.Unfortunately, it should be noted that until now, humiliating for a Svan woman, the custom of receiving payment for a girl who is given in marriage and In addition, there is still a custom of betraying girls at a very early age. This custom is explained by the lack of women. When the girl's father expresses his consent to the betrothal, the future son-in-law gives something to the bride as a sign of betrothal , after which he is treated. Then the groom invites the parents of nevsta to him, treats them in turn and gives them a bull. melts, the groom pays the bride's parents a kind of kalym with cattle and takes the bride to his house. The wedding ceremony begins by fastening the wedding dresses with a needle. On the head of the young people are put on crowns woven from grape vines, and prayers are read; then mo-dh is given communion with bread diluted in water. The abduction of girls and even women was relatively common in Svaneti not long ago. Ernstov in his Notes on Svaneti reports that at least a quarter of the inhabitants had girls and women abducted by their wives. The main reason for such a wild phenomenon is, as has been said, a significant excess of the male population. Meanwhile, the isolated situation of Svaneti makes it extremely difficult to find a wife outside of her native mountains. In view of the lack of women, a widow is allowed to marry her husband’s brother or next of kin, which under no circumstances is allowed among the Khevsurs. According to the Svanetian tradition, a married daughter gets married. new year from parents as a gift a horse, bull or sheep, depending on the wealth of the family. After her death, the right to receive such a gift is inherited by the husband or children of the deceased. The first childbirth of a married daughter must take place in the family home. No family celebration should be complete without the presence of a daughter. Just like among the Khevsurs, a Svan woman, during menstruation, is considered unclean and is isolated somewhere in an uninhabited shack, where she must spend seven days alone; at the time of childbirth, the Svan woman was settled in a special uninhabited room, where she awaited the onset of childbirth. When the birth took place, a spiritual person was called to consecrate the house. Before the baptism of the child, he was guarded at night, maintaining a constant fire, fearing that the devil would replace him with his offspring. The Svans are convinced that all sick children: idiots, dumb, ugly, are such substituted by the devil who were poorly guarded before baptism. It should be noted that goiter and cretinism (alpine disease) are extremely common in Svaneti. The child is baptized by lowering it into the font; instead of peace, they use soot from smoke or soot diluted in oil, with which the godfather lubricates the child, then the mother; sticks, which are used for lubrication, after the completion of this rite, are thrown into the fire.In some times there was a wild, though rare, custom of killing newborn girls. It should be noted that among all Georgian tribes, the birth of girls does not please their relatives. Georgians, appreciating the worker, usually joyfully welcome the birth of a boy. Vengeance in Svaneti is still very widespread. Both men and women adhere to the custom of blood feud in Svaneti. F. Makharadze in his essay "Svaneti" tells how during a rally, while he spoke about the complete senselessness of revenge and its destructive consequences for the Svanetian people, one woman beat another out of revenge. However, recently, cases of blood revenge has dropped significantly. The Svans themselves are beginning to realize the whole meaninglessness of this ancient custom and they themselves demand an energetic struggle on the part of the government. We will not dwell on the life of a Tushino woman, since this life has many similarities with the life of a Khevsurian woman. The Tushins, as indicated, are nomads, which is naturally reflected in the life of a Tushin woman. Summing up this chapter on the position of women in Georgia, before the Soviet regime, it should be added that the position of a Georgian woman is significantly different from that in the rest of the East. The Georgian woman, as we have seen, is a free woman everywhere, with the exception of some bearish corners, where else It didn’t manage to penetrate culture and shake the age-old foundations of archaic life.
3. A woman of Georgia under Soviet rule
The Sovietization of Georgia heralds a new era for a Georgian woman in her emancipation from the oppression of the old way of life and age-old traditions. We have seen that the natural conditions of some parts of Georgia pose huge, difficult-to-overcome obstacles to the expansion of schools, the creation of cooperative organizations, and so on. We saw that the main obstacle in these remote corners of Georgia is the complete absence of roads. And yet, much has already been done over the years of the existence of Soviet power. The railway line Mingrelia-Guria was built; the communication with Khevsureti has been significantly improved, a wheel road to Svan-etiya is being built. What has been done to date is only the beginning, the first milestones that outline the forward movement of culture to the abandoned, hitherto cut off from the whole world corners, where, as we see, life is at a difficult to define cultural level. And in-s-e, what has been done, yielded its results, yielded results that we will try to summarize. The October Revolution, which made great shifts in all corners of the USSR, to a certain extent also affected the life of the Khevsurs , and if we take into account the geographical position of Khevsureti, its isolation, lack of roads, etc., it will become clear that in this harsh country, lost in the deep gorges of the Main Caucasian ridge, a tremendous amount of work needs to be done in order for that archaic life in which • live! The Khevsurs, to bring them closer to the level of our culture, to get rid of the features of that barbaric way of life, in which this peculiar, free people still lives. First of all, it is necessary to make every effort to get rid of the barbaric practice of samrevlo, which is destructive on the health of women, blood feud and other features of archaic life. In Shatila, we had to hear from the Khevsurs that they understand the harm of samrevlo, but they themselves do not dare to abandon this custom. Naturally, the most reliable means in the fight against the indicated ugly features of Khevsurian life is school. Unfortunately, until now, there are no schools in Khevsureti. According to the information we received from Dushetskopo Narobra: - in the near future, it is planned to open six schools of the 1st stage. All these schools promise to build, the Khevsurs themselves, the funds needed to pay the teachers' salaries will be allocated by the Department of Public Education. Unfortunately, the teaching staff is weak, often with a lower education. Last season, three educational programs worked in Khevsureti, which allowed about 100 people to pass. There is no medical help; two medical centers are planned: in Shatila and in Arkhbti. There are currently four schools in Pshavia. We visited one of these schools, in Shuapho. The school building consists of two rooms; the one in which the classes are taking place is six steps long and five wide, dark, dirty; there are no benches, children learn while sitting on boards laid directly on the floor. There are 27 boys studying here. The room next door is larger, cleaner, brighter; When we asked why classes were not held in this room, we were told that attempts were made to transfer the students here, but the boys refused to move, since this room is considered unclean due to the fact that it played the role of “barefoot.” In 1927-28. six more schools are expected to open. The age of students is usually from 12 to 18 years old, in some cases up to 22-23 years old. The teaching takes place from October to March. In Pshavia there is a reading room with a radio installation. Last season, there were two libkez who allowed 70 people to pass. In Pshavia, as already mentioned, there is a noticeable shift towards the liberation of women from the humiliating and harmful custom of isolating themselves in the "barefoot". During childbirth, in severe cases, women begin to gradually seek help from a midwife; the attentive attitude, facilitating the patient's situation, gives its results and the trust of the pshavok in the selfless representatives of medicine is growing and gaining strength, and lately, as we have been told, pshaviks are more and more willing to seek help. In Svaneti, the work of the Soviet government influenced significantly more tangible forms. Recently, the Svans give the impression of people awakened from centuries of hibernation. Despite their backwardness, isolation from the cultural world, the Svans have complete confidence in everything new, which should radically transform their entire life. Eagerly and with complete confidence they go for help to hospitals, of which there are currently two open in Svaneti (in addition, there are also outpatient clinics;) with doctors, midwives, and paramedics, a pharmacy and a dental office x); this trust is especially promoted by the selfless work of doctors, who are attentive and patient with everyone who comes for help. Successful operations that free the Svans from goiter, which, as indicated, is extremely common in Svaneti, also contributes to the confidence that is gradually growing among the population in medical care. Svan youth, realizing that it is impossible to live in the old way, literally thirsts for enlightenment. Recently, a number of schools (4-year-olds) have been opened in Svanetian villages; significant work for the opening of the seven-year plan. Education in schools is conducted in Georgian. A significant number of Svan youth study in Tiflis and Kutaisi secondary and higher educational institutions. Unfortunately, the government does not have sufficient funds to fully meet this growing need for literacy and build a sufficient number of schools in Svaneti itself ... In addition, on the part of the Svan youth, there is a definite desire to join the Komsomol. However, in this respect, too, it does not meet with sufficient support, since there is not a sufficient number of relevant leaders. The biggest evil, the most significant brake on raising the cultural level in THIS country is off-road. A country cut off from the whole world for eight months a year naturally cannot join culture in the absence of wheeled roads, that is, constant and reliable communication with the outside world. Carrying out the 'wheel track, which was carried out in the near future, must be considered the greatest achievement and great merit of the Soviet power. At present, there are two clubs in Adjarastan — one in Batum, the other in Kobuleti. Women's clubs in Adjarian are the only means of raising the cultural level of Adjarian women. At these clubs, in addition to the school for the eradication of illiteracy, cutting and sewing, loud reading, and so on. sections were organized - legal, medical and children's; the legal one prepares the adjarok-legal protestors, and the medical one, in addition to medical care and the dispensing of medicines, is working on sanitary and hygienic education. The attendance of the clubs is increasing more and more, therefore, the number of Ajar women who are involved in social and cultural work in one of the most backward corners of Georgia, inhabited by Mohammedan Georgians, is constantly growing. Thus, o-br-aom, we see that now certain prerequisites for improving the situation of the Georgian mountain woman, we also see that the main obstacles to the more rapid advancement of culture in the most remote corners of Georgia are: impassability, tenacious archaic life and, finally, the absence of cultural workers from their own environment, who would be fully trusted population; we have seen that, for example, in Svaneti, teaching has to be conducted in Georgian, while the Svans have their own language. Turning to an overview of the achievements on the cultural front of the whole of Georgia, it should be said that with the advent of Soviet power, it has changed dramatically for the better. primarily the political position of women. The growth of political consciousness was especially affected by the participation of a Georgian woman in the current re-election to the councils: the percentage of female voters who came to exercise their right increased to 35.5 against 20.9 "/ o last year." 1.940 women were elected to the Councils, which is 8.2 v / o, (last year, 1.607 women or 8.1 v / 0 were elected). A total of 2.680 women were elected to local government bodies. Female Communists of the CPSU (b) of Georgia on May 1, 1926 it was 1.511; of these, 718 members and 739 candidates. As a result of the re-election of delegates in 25/26, 325 delegate points were organized, uniting 9.679 delegates; of them: peasant women — 65 o / o, female workers — 9.03 o / o, office workers — 6.37 o / o, housewives — 14.7 o / o, unaccounted-for — 4.9 o / o, social workers — 10.628 people. At present, under the Ts. O. there has been created an institute of interns-promoted women workers and peasant women, who, having undergone a certain training, will be transferred to independent work. Work is underway among the girls of Georgia — the connection with the Central Committee of the LKSMG has been formalized and strengthened. As of January 1, 25, there were 1,840 girls in the Komsomol of Georgia, out of a total of 24,874 or 7.4 v / v. Labor conditions have also changed for the better; thanks to the land reform, the growth of cooperation, the emergence of new branches of labor, etc., the economic prerequisites appeared for the development of the national economy of Georgia. There are 146,553 trade union members throughout Georgia; of this number of women, 27.357 or 18.1%. 302 women are members of the cross committees, 4.3.95 in cooperatives; in other organizations of women members, 4.991. Artels - 31; they have 53 women. Vocational schools - 32; women in them - 396. Fig. 2. A newly opened silk-winding factory in Telava (Georgia). In 25-26, 734 women were involved in factory schools. The number of consultations is 13. Through the departments for the protection of mothers and infants under the People's Commissariat of Health, work is being carried out to protect mothers and infants. Special Commission Cargo. CEC for the International Day of Women Workers on March 8 this year. issued a number of resolutions: the People's Commissariat for Health was proposed to allocate from the republican medical background: yes, the insured the necessary amount to open nurseries in Kutanoi, Ozurgeti and Telava; The People's Commissariat of Agriculture was proposed to organize a women's collective of village-households in the Tiflis district. artels, supplying it with the necessary seeds and agricultural. tools. At the same time, the need to organize women's collectives in the counties was recognized; for this purpose, the People's Commissariat of Agriculture was asked to find land plots from the stock lands. The People's Commissariat of Labor (it is prescribed! to lead a struggle against the displacement of female labor in  enterprises and institutions, increase the armor of adolescent girls, increase the number of women in collectives, increase the percentage of women sent by the labor exchange to work, organize groups of unemployed women and courses to improve the qualifications of female labor; in addition, to increase the number of women receiving benefits, to take measures to improve the work of women in enterprises and to dismiss the commission for improving the labor and living conditions of women workers at Georgia. The Central Election Commission, necessary for the opening of the dyeing funds from the fund of labor aid. The People's Commissariat of Education was asked to release sewing machines for vocational schools in Dusheti, Ozurgeti and Lechkhum. To expand the work of the kindergarten, at the Adjarok club in Batum, give one teacher and to equip ten women's corners in Georgia to release literature and stationery. Turning to the publishing business, it should be noted that currently in Georgia the magazine "Worker" (formerly. "Chveni Gza") and a number of books were published devoted to the study of the women's issue and the women's movement, which should serve as material both for the work of delegate meetings and for cell organizers of women. This is, in general terms, the life of a Georgian woman in the past and present. what has been said, it should be emphasized once again that the life of a Georgian city dweller is almost no different from the life of a city dweller in any part of our Union; As for the life of a Georgian peasant woman in Georgia proper, for a number of the reasons listed above, it hardly differs from the life of a Russian peasant woman. Finally, the life of a Georgian mountain woman, lost in the slums of gorges and 'inaccessible mountains', is still the initial stages of human culture ... It is precisely here that the attention of the Soviet government and the leaders of the women's movement in Georgia should be directed mainly.