1 General outline of the Adyghe-Circassian Autonomous Region
Since time immemorial, the Caucasus has been inhabited by freedom-loving and warlike mountain tribes, who have preserved their peculiar everyday and socio-economic order for millennia. One of such tribes in the North Caucasus are the Circassians-Adyge. Before the Caucasian wars, the Circassian tribes lived in the northern part of the Black Sea coast, spreading their possessions far to the east up to Chechnya. Historians believe that all the Circassian tribes at that time numbered up to two million people. According to their political structure, the Circassian tribes were divided into two groups: aristocratic and democratic. The first group had princes who ruled the tribes through the nobles. The second group had no princes; government and court here were in the hands of the people themselves, who elected elders and judges and gave them power. In the hands of these elected rulers, the court and the decision of important national issues were concentrated, such as war, peace, the performance of public works, etc. In their decisions they were guided by the norms of "adat" x), later d) Adat - customary law, a set of folk customs and popular legal practice in all spheres of public life, Muslim religious law was added to it. The existence of two different tribal groups of the Circassian people with different political organization, aristocratic and democratic, led to constant internecine wars among the Circassians. This circumstance prevented their unification into one state, capable of opposing itself to a common enemy and played an important role in the final defeat of the Circassians by Russian troops. The Circassians lived in auls. Mutual wear in the family was built on the basis of patriarchy. The father is the unlimited lord and master of the family. The place and rights of the deceased father pass to the eldest son. The head of the house gives instructions and disposes of the household. The rest of the members obey his will implicitly. Women and men live in a Circassian family completely isolated. Only unmarried sons of the owner and relatives close to the family can visit the main saklya, where women are in the daytime. It was considered indecent for the owner of the house or his married sons to appear there. The position of the daughter-in-law in the Circassian family attracts attention with its originality. She does not show herself to her father-in-law all her life, calls all family members by fictitious pet names and the like. According to historians, the Circassians have professed the Christian religion since the 6th century AD. Since the 18th century, the Turkish sultans have implanted the Mohammedan religion among them.In the conditions of the meager, mountainous nature, the mental powers of the Circassians, in general, were far from poor, were directed almost exclusively to military affairs and to satisfy the urgent needs of life. The Circassians did not eat their writing and sleep appeared only since 1917. Their societies were permeated with ordinary principles. One of the typical mountain customs is, for example, the custom of hospitality, which has existed since time immemorial. It arose out of the ancestor cult. Feeding at the hearth, the souls of the ancestors by their constant presence around it, give it a special holiness. This nature of the hearth also explains the fact that any stranger who comes into contact with it (for which it is considered sufficient to cross the threshold of the sakli, or taste the food cooked on the hearth), becomes a temporary member of the family and has the right to count on its help and protection. Circassians have a custom according to which the elders are respected. The respect of the younger for the elders is expressed in the fact that in the presence of the latter, the younger stand until they receive an invitation to sit down. The elders eat first, then the younger. If two are walking, the elder is on the right side, the younger on the left. Any old man without ceremony demands services from any young man and he is obliged to perform without any rebellion. Among the Circassians there was a clan institution of bloody revenge, when the murder or major insult of a member of one clan caused revenge on the part of members of another clan. It is widely believed that the Cherkassians were exclusively engaged in robberies, robberies and predation. There is nothing more wrong with this view. The economy and well-being of the people was based on productive agricultural labor, and not on robberies and raids. The Circassians were also engaged in crafts: blacksmith, carpentry, saddlery; The art of decorating weapons was considered a particularly noble occupation. In the struggle of the Caucasian mountaineers for their independence with the Russian conquerors, the Circassians were the last to fall. This unequal 'bloody heroic struggle of the Circassians with a foreign yoke lasted too sixty years. It was not without reason that it provoked the historical words of Karl Marx in the 40s of the last century: “The brave Circassians again inflicted several serious defeats on the Russians. Nations, learn from them what people who want to remain free are capable of. ”In 1864, the Circassians were finally broken and subordinated to Russia, and after the victory the tsarist government adopted a number of repressive measures against the Circassians. Defeated and driven out by Russian troops from their native villages, the Circassians were forced to leave their homeland and move to other lands. A number of Circassian tribes were completely expelled to Turkey; at the same time, the expulsion was provided with such conditions that a huge part of the population perished in the Caucasus mountains from hunger and cold. The evicted did not even have the opportunity to seize their belongings and the most valuable property was buried in the ground, while their sakli were burned. The chain of burial mounds that covered the path of the evicted Circassians to the shores of the Black Sea testified to the suffering experienced by the Circassian settlers. A smaller part of the Circassian population submitted to Russia and was resettled to the plain along the Kuban and Laba rivers. The fate of the Circassians who remained in their homeland was little better than the fate of those who left: abuse, insults and mockery of the exhausted people — they all had to endure along with hardships and various diseases caused by their inability to adapt to the new unhealthy swampy area. Then, as in the entire Caucasus, the tsarist government found a loyal support among the Circassians c. the face of the privileged classes, which, in turn, exploited the lower classes. The laboring agricultural mass of the population locked itself in a shell of failure, persistently ignored the Russian language, Russian customs and Russian customs. National alienation and fear of everything Russian developed. The exceptional strength of the oppression of the tsarist government with its russification policy could not fail to dull the national and political instinct of the Circassians. There was no longer the freedom-loving and warlike Circassian, sung in folk tales; there was a Circassian labor mass and the upper classes in the person of the privileged nobles and princes. It was not for nothing that when the February revolution broke out, this aristocratic-intellectual elite used the masses to direct them against the Bolsheviks, and later with the white generals, against Soviet power. Soon, however, a healthy instinct predicted to the masses that the business of the generals and the nobility was not their business. The Circassians began to defect from the White Army, often forming partisan detachments that waged a war with the White Guards. The Soviet power that came to the Kuban and was finally established here in 1920, proceeding from the principles of protecting small nationalities, takes on the organization of the Circassians: a special commissariat for affairs is organized under the Kubcherrevkom. highlanders, then renamed the mountain section. The latter begins organizational work among the population. In this regard, Circassian congresses are convened to discuss issues related to the formation of Autonomy. The Adyghe-Cherkess Autonomous Region was formed on July 27, 1922 from a part of the former Kuban Region. The region is located in a narrow strip from 10 to 30 versts in width along the left bank of the Kuban and Laba rivers, occupying 276.626 dessiatines or 2.655 sq. versts with a population of 114,570 people. If we remember that the possessions of the Circassians before the Caucasian wars stretched from the shores of the Black Sea to mountainous Chechnya, that their number reached two million people, we are faced with a vivid picture of the tragic path along which the Circassian people passed. The stretching territory of the region is interrupted by numerous rivers originating in the mountains and foothills of the Caucasus. Some of them flow into the Laba River, some into the Kuban. Along with this, a number of small rivers, before reaching the Kuban, form extensive floodplains, which dry up only in autumn, and are covered with water during the rest of the year. The water that got into the floodplains lingers here for too long, having no flow towards the Kuban due to the presence of the coastal barrier formed by the muddy deposit of the Kuban. All this puts a definite imprint on the nature of the soil, vegetation and climate of the oblast, and, consequently, on the occupations of the population. At the same time, this circumstance makes the region one of the largest foci of malaria. The communication routes in the region are mainly country roads; in winter, in the rainy season, a riding horse becomes the only reliable means of transportation. The administrative center of the region is located in the city of Krasnodar, which is not part of the Autonomous Region. There are no urban areas in the region. Administratively, Adygea is divided into five districts. According to soil, climatic and economic conditions, it is customary to divide it into three regions: zapatny, central and southeastern. The central region is predominantly agricultural (and economically the most powerful region. It is also concentrated here, mainly, the Russian part of the population. Economically less well-off is the western region, where the population has long been engaged mainly in extensive cattle breeding. Soil and climatic conditions for grain crops here are less favorable. Hence the lack of bread, which prompts the population to look for subsidiary earnings; this also led to the development of handicraft industries in this area on a small scale - the manufacture of cloth Circassian women are mainly engaged in making them, and the cloaks are remarkable for their quality. ate in other areas. In the southeastern region of the region, due to the remoteness from the markets and the mountainous relief of the surface, the population is mainly engaged in primitive animal husbandry. A special type of Circassian cattle has been preserved here! with valuable dairy qualities. The main source of economic well-being of the population is agriculture. The distribution of land by land within the region presents the following picture (in ° / o ° / o): under settlements 3.6, under arable land 38.8, forests and shrubs 9.3, hayfields - 10.7, pastures - 15.3 and uncomfortable land - 22.5. The main agricultural crops in the region are wheat, sunflower, corn, potatoes and tobacco, and tobacco is not the last in the country's economy. Recently, attempts have been made to instill in the peasant economy the culture of kenaf as a plant that can replace jute for the preparation of coarse sack fabrics. Since ancient times, the Circassians were engaged in cattle breeding, and mainly horse breeding. Circassian horses, huge herds of which roamed the Kuban steppes, were famous not only in the Caucasus, but also far beyond its borders. The total number of head of livestock in the region, which in 1914 was 236.355 (including 46.600 horses and 63.0С0 cattle), decreased in 1922 thanks to the imperialist and civil wars, to 124.450, but by 1925 it again increased to 9Оо / о pre-war figures. The factory-type manufacturing industry in the region is in its infancy. The first place in it belongs to the milling industry; then comes the tannery and oil mill. The timber industry serves only local needs, whereas with the correct formulation of business, forestry production! can serve as one of the lucrative sources of the region. It is especially necessary to note the achievements of the Soviet government in the educational work of the Circassian population. Everyone knows the tsarist policy of the pre-revolutionary period in the education of national minorities. This policy was aimed mainly at keeping the nationalities in darkness and ignorance, setting them against each other and building their well-being on this. Such a policy could not lead the Circassians to enlightenment, and by 1914 the number of literates barely reached 3%. Only the October Revolution made it possible) to begin the work of enlightening the population. In 1925, there (instead of the previous 12 schools (with a Russification bias, which the laboring mass was alienated from) with a total number of students in 4C0 souls, there were already about 100 schools with about 7.0C0 boys and girls. Every year the number of schools and number of students is increasing.Many schools are working on new programs.Increased attention is paid to the social and political education of children.

2. The position of the Circassian woman before the October Revolution
The whole life of a Circassian woman before the revolution was surrounded by a number of shy customs, often completely barbaric in character. tight corset and do not take it off until marriage. This barbaric custom of restraining the body did the fact that the girl's breasts did not develop, and, most importantly, predisposed her to tuberculosis. According to Circassians, incomplete breasts are the first condition for a girl's beauty. The corset was worn on the girl under the shirt. It consisted of some kind of fabric with a lacing in the front and with two flexible wooden plates squeezing both breasts. Girls from noble families sewed a corset of red morocco or velvet and trimmed it with silver or gold braids. The Circassian woman was freed from this uncomfortable and harmful part of her dress only when she got married, when the young husband ripped open the cord in front of the corset and took it off forever. This habit was widespread mainly in the families of nobles and princes. In general, the costume of the Circassian woman is notable for its picturesqueness. A long white shirt with a slit on the chest and wide sleeves is worn over the bottom dress. The shirt is pulled together at the waist with a wide belt with a silver buckle d. A silk beshmet is worn over this shirt, usually of some bright color. On the legs are light chuvyachki, trimmed with braids; a round cap on the head, also decorated with braids and topped with white muslin with long ends falling behind the back. Hair that is loose over the shoulders curls from under the cap. Unlike women of other eastern nations, the Circassian woman did not wear a long veil; a girl could be in a male company, dance with young people and walk freely among guests, but always accompanied by one of her relatives. Everyone could visit; girl and see her. From an early age, all the dreams of a young girl were directed towards one goal - to marry a brave man. She reluctantly gives her hand to the person in whose past; several cases of bold forays that ended in the withdrawal of cattle and horses cannot be indicated. The ideal of the warrior-horseman has been preserved to this day in the girl's imagination. The girl in most cases had the opportunity to choose her own groom. Matchmaking began after the groom met the girl through friends and confidants. The young man could himself directly woo, visiting the girl's house for this purpose. Although in most cases the parents did not formally prevent their daughter from choosing a bridegroom, in fact they often preferred another, more noble and wealthy groom, who could pay more than a kalym, and helped him to kidnap his daughter. Such sale of girls was usually practiced by the Circassians before, but it has remained partially in our time. It is clear that such an order caused corresponding excesses, since the offended groom considered himself severely offended. The fact is that, according to the basic principles of highland customary law, the bridegroom was, as it were, the inalienable property of the groom. Such an insult to the groom belonged to the category of intolerable insults and, in order to restore his honor, the groom decided to take the most extreme measures.Despite all the consequences of the forced abduction of brides, nevertheless, this kind of abduction from the Circassians, especially from the poorest part of the population, was very frequent and marriage with abduction, preferred to ordinary marriage. This preference for kidnapping the bride, instead of marrying her through normal matchmaking, finds its explanation in the material insecurity of the population. Under normal matchmaking, the groom was obliged to pay the kalym as much as was required of him; in case of abduction, when the girl, after days spent in the abductor's house, became his legal wife, the kalym was appointed by the arbitration court, in proportion to the property status of the groom. The Circassians decided to kidnap also because by this act they were exempted from many costs associated with matchmaking. It should also be borne in mind that kidnapping a bride was considered a valiant business, one that deserves approval and imitation.It is worth noting that the custom of bride kidnapping in modern conditions is already acquiring a certain character of a criminal offense. It is difficult to get rid of the customs rooted in the minds of the people in several years. I would like to tell here the story of the abduction of a girl whom I had to observe in 1921 during my work in one of the villages of the region. A Circassian came to a young girl and, after spending some time with her, invited her to marry him. The Circassian custom allows jokes between young people who meet for the first time, when one side proposes to marry him, and the other responds with consent to this proposal. Thinking that the words of the Circassian belong precisely to this category of jokes, the young girl, laughing, answered with consent. After that, the Circassian left. "After some time, the same Circassian came to her again and offered her to become his wife. Seeing that the matter was taking a serious turn, the girl refused. Then the Circassian began to threaten to kidnap her by force, and indeed after a while, at night he broke into her house with Entering the room, there was a girl with her old mother, the Circassians invited her to go with them to the aul (the "offended" groom. The girl hid behind the old woman's back in fear and despair. The kidnappers pushed her away and dragged the girl out into the street. screams two old men — close relatives, girls — began to ask the kidnappers to leave her alone. For resisting the violent abduction, they were immediately killed. This was the brutal kidnapping. It must be said that the act of these "fellows" caused the most decisive anger of the entire Circassian population. This is a guarantee that such customs will be overcome and eliminated by the population. The Mahometan 'law allows polygamy, but the Circassians generally rarely benefit They have this right and this is understandable, because the poverty of the Circassian does not allow him to support several wives. It is characteristic that among the Circassians they have several wives, mainly mullahs and other clergy. Marriage among the Circassians is considered an agreement of mutual consent. The religious side of the wedding ceremony among the Circassians consists only in the fact that, after mutual consent to marriage, the spouses say a special prayer in the presence of the mullah. Then the mullah draws up a written marriage deed, where the obligations assumed by the husband in relation to his wife are precisely indicated. Here, the amount of kalym paid for the bride is also precisely indicated. The very marriage of the Circassians takes place outside the groom's house. Usually the groom brings his bride not directly to his house, but to the house of his closest friend; if it is assumed that the bride's parents do not agree to the marriage and can interfere with their intervention, then the act of marriage is performed here. If there is no such danger, then the marriage takes place in the groom's house after the bride is brought from the friend's house. In someone else's house, the newlywed sometimes stays for quite a long time until she gets acquainted with the new way of life, which she will have to {lead in marriage. According to the existing custom, the husband of the newlywed has no right to stay with; her all the time. From the young wife, he leaves to one of his friends and from there he visits her to accompany his friend, but not otherwise than after sunset. Before dawn, the newlyweds part and the husband goes back to his friend. The end of the temporary 'stay of the bride in a strange house is marked by celebrations that sometimes last for several days in a row. In general, marriage among the Circassians is considered a great event and they do not skimp on the organization of various celebrations. Usually they organize festivities with dancing, singing and other games, where all young people of both sexes from the surrounding villages are invited. After these celebrations, the young woman is already finally settling in her husband's house, and the very sending her there does not do without the corresponding rituals. The bride is accompanied by a noisy wedding train of horsemen singing, shooting and racing. During the entire wedding, the bride's head and face are covered with a scarf. The young spouse does not take any part in the general celebration. He seems to be on the sidelines. Folk etiquette makes him stay in solitude or go somewhere else to another village. He returns home not earlier than the end of the wedding celebration. If a Circassian girl before her marriage has a certain freedom of action, and a rather privileged position in the family of father and mother, then when she marries she turns into a slave in the true sense of the word. This is what the harsh norms of highland customary law strive for. How barbarous, for example, is the custom of the Circassians that the wife would never dare to call her Husband by his name either in the eyes or behind the eyes, just as the husband does not condescend to this in relation to her. The names "he" and "she" replace the proper names of husband and wife in the Circassian family life. It is considered reprehensible and even humiliating to caress children, or a wife, and generally talk about them in the presence of third parties. It goes without saying that all these customs are rooted in the traditions of the people that have developed over centuries. A married Circassian woman does not appear anywhere, no one sees her. In addition to her husband, she can only show herself to her father, sons, brothers, etc., and in general to all children who do not yet understand the difference between the sexes. According to the harsh customs of the Circassians, it is considered indecent for a husband to show himself with his wife outside the house. A wife can talk to her husband only at night, since Circassian etiquette does not allow her husband to appear in the female half of the house during the day. A woman cannot talk freely with a stranger, she should not, walking down the street, generally talk loudly, laugh and look at strangers. The wife does not even have the right to say goodbye to her dead husband; she is not allowed to be in the room where the deceased lies. She sits at home, looks after the household, weaves cloth and canvas as needed and dresses the children and her husband from head to toe. Circassian women are distinguished by their remarkable art In their works: the skill with which they sew Circassians and Caucasian chuyachyachki can be the envy of any master. The dress itself is more likely to wear out and tear than the seam made by their hand will burst. In all the works of the Circassian woman, a delicate taste is noticed. The ability to work well is considered by the Circassians, along with beauty, the first dignity; women According to established traditions, the husband is given complete domination over his wife, since his responsibility lies with the maintenance of his wife and children. The husband considers his wife to be his slave, an unrequited being who is not even allowed to complain about her husband. The slightest order of the husband must be unconditionally executed. Such a depressed state of a married Circassian woman occurs mainly because a kalym is paid for her. After all, she was bought, therefore, she is the complete property of her husband! The proverb “let the wife fear her husband” has found a classic application in the conditions of Circassian reality. Despite the rudeness and despotism of family relations, a woman in some cases enjoys the protection of a man. Circassians 1 are extremely sensitive to insult her. Among them there is a custom, according to which any revenge, punishment, and still less murder, cannot be carried out in the presence of a woman. Hua is postponed until another occasion. A woman with her hair down, rushing into the middle of the combatants, stops the murder. The persecuted, who has found the protection of the woman, remains harmless. If the woman is widowed, then one of the brothers of the deceased can marry her. This undoubtedly is an echo of a long gone era, when the ancient Circassians had a peculiar social system in which all men and women within one clan or tribal group were like brothers and sisters. The marriage was strictly exogamous, that is, did not allow taking a wife from his own tribe and she was acquired from another clan or tribal group.And since the wife was bought with the common funds of the whole group, then after the death of her husband she continued to make up the common property of his clan or tribe. This kind of abandonment of a woman in the family after the death of her husband is observed as a curious relic, albeit extremely rarely, and in a different form, among the Circassians and in our time. I would like to tell about this fact that I have observed in my life. In 1918, after the death of her husband, a young Circassian woman remained in his family and married her older brother, a consumptive old man of 70-75 years old. It goes without saying that the actual cohabitation between a young and full, strong woman and a sick old man could not be long, and in 1920 she demanded a divorce. The court of honorary old men of the aul, which examined this issue and was guided exclusively by the norms of Muslim religious law, decided the case in favor of the old man. It took a lot of strength, energy and conviction before; Soviet and cultural and educational organizations of the aul managed to protect the rights of a young woman and win her back from a sick old man. Divorces are allowed among the Circassians and are usually carried out by sending the wife to her relatives with a demand for the return of the kalym. It should be noted that the guilt of one of the spouses is necessarily put in the basis of the divorce, and if the husband cannot prove his wife's guilt and divorces simply at will or arbitrarily, then he loses the right to receive the kalym back. On the other hand, if the wife refused to live with her husband and left him without sufficient reason, then the kalym returned in full. Usually, divorce was practiced as punishment for the wife for disobeying her husband or for violating marital fidelity. In the old days there was another kind of punishment for adultery; namely, the Sharia court, which was particularly strict. He could in those days give his spouse the right to punishment up to the murder of his wife. This, of course, is not surprising, if we bear in mind that the cruel punishment for adultery exists among almost all peoples at a low stage of development. Such a punishment was quite consistent with the spirit of Muslim law, which the Circassians adhere to. The birth of a child is not an event of particular joy or importance for the Circassians. It is not accompanied by any ceremony. The name of the newborn is given completely arbitrarily by one of the closest neighbors or relatives, and the person who gave the name to the child must make him a shirt. The Circassians have a rather peculiar custom: after a year has passed since the birth of a child, objects such as a mirror, weapons, keys, scissors, etc. are laid out in front of him. Depending on what the child will accept from these objects, they judge what this child will look like when he grows up. So, for example, if he takes a mirror, he will be a dandy, keys - a clever thief, weapons - a warlike horseman, etc. Parents experience true pleasure when a child touches a weapon. The upbringing of children among Circassians is different depending on the class to which belongs to the child. Poor classes usually bring them up at home. A child up to 7-8 years old is with the mother and then goes to the father, who teaches him to work. The children of the privileged estates are brought up on the side in someone else's house and only after reaching the age of 16 they return to their parent's house. In this case, all parental rights are transferred to the educator and the parents do not see the child. If the child is a girl, then upon her marriage the kalym is paid to the educator. The return of the child from the educator to the parent's home is often marked by great celebrations. It remains to say a little about the legal capacity of the Circassian woman, which was provided to her in pre-revolutionary times. Women could be witnesses in both civil and criminal cases, but their testimony was accepted only when the testimony of several men was the same. The testimony of some women, as witnesses, was accepted exclusively in matters concerning the birth and physical disabilities of women. They could be attorneys for divorce affairs, they could be appointed guardians, if there were no worthy men available. In the old days, it was forbidden to commit blood revenge on a pregnant woman and subject her to corporal punishment until she was released from the burden. All of the above allows us to form a whole idea of ​​the pre-revolutionary situation of a Circassian woman from individual pieces of everyday life. Despite some of the privileges she enjoyed, her life was not easy. As a general rule *, a Circassian woman was belittled, submissive to the will of her husband, accustomed to looking at herself as a being of a lower order, to work, to give birth and to die resignedly. She was happy if her husband, by virtue of his natural qualities, was kind and condescending to her: upbringing, family traditions and material conditions of existence prepared her for a difficult life and did not give an opportunity to start the struggle for family, social and cultural emancipation. This opportunity appeared only with Soviet power.

3. Legal, cultural and economic achievements of the Circassian woman under Soviet rule
If the Russian worker and peasant languished under the yoke of the capitalists, landlords and the tsar, then the Circassian peasant endured a double oppression; he was oppressed as a peasant — it was class oppression; he was also oppressed along the national line — it was a great power oppression. Simultaneously with the development of the national policy of the Soviet government, aimed at the emancipation of small nationalities inhabiting our republics and regions, the task of emancipating the Circassian toiler arose. 1) The appeal of the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR on February 13, 1925 to the peoples inhabiting the national republics and regions of the Soviet East on the rights of working women in the Soviet East and the need to combat all types of their enslavement in the field of economic and family life; 2) The draft resolution of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee and the Council of People's Commissars of the RSFSR on supplementing the Criminal Code of the RSFSR with a new Chapter X on crimes constituting remnants of family life, submitted by the Presidium of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee for consideration of the II Session of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee of the 13th convocation and sent out preliminarily to the places for broad discussion. The above acts contain the confirmation of the inalienable fundamental rights of working women of the East and extends completely also to the Circassian woman, we cite it in full: “The Great October Revolution destroyed the power of the tsar, capitalists and beys and liberated the oppressed peoples of the Soviet East from centuries-old national oppression. The peasant power cleared the way for fraternal cooperation of peoples and united them into the voluntary Union of the SSR. Following the behests of the great leader and friend of the oppressed peoples, Lenin, the Soviet government set itself the task of raising the most enslaved part of the working population - the many millions of toilers of the East and attracting them to building but The Republic of Soviets seven years ago, in the days of the October Revolution, proclaimed the complete and all-round emancipation of women. Slowly but steadily, the Workers 'and Peasants' Government in recent years has achieved certain practical measures to achieve the actual equality of women. The liberating influence of the revolution has already affected the main the mass of the female masses of the Eastern peoples and set before millions of working people the task of promoting and supporting the all-round emancipation of women. However, everyday and religious prejudices (customary law, adat, sharia), enslaving the female half of the peoples of the East with special force, made it difficult and difficult to emancipate the worker of the East. the release of an Eastern woman, it is necessary to involve the broad masses of the peoples of the East in this matter. Therefore, the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR considers it necessary to draw the attention of the entire population of the national republics and autonomous regions to the fact that o - until now, Uzbek and Turk, Kyrgyz and Kalmyk, Yakut, Buryat and other women of the Soviet East have not freed themselves from age-old oppression based on old customs and have not been duly drawn into the ranks of the persecutors of the Soviet state. The Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR calls on the working people of all nationalities of the Soviet East to unswervingly monitor the implementation of all laws protecting the rights of women, to fight all forms of enslavement of her and to take all measures to attract the workers of the East to participate in public and political life, at all stages of state work. oppressed woman of the East in her struggle for liberation for her complete emancipation in the field of economic, legal and family life, the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR considers it necessary to remind and clarify again those rights of the toiler of the East, which were proclaimed in the first days of the great October revolution and found their expression in further Soviet legislation. 1) According to the Constitution of the USSR, a woman of the East enjoys the right to elect and be elected to all bodies of Soviet power, not excluding the highest state institutions. A working woman must exercise this right, cast her vote in elections to councils and be an active member of all organizations to which she is elected. 2) A woman of the East enjoys, on an equal basis with a man, all civil rights and bears the duties established by the Civil Code. She is given the freedom to choose occupations and professions, acquire and alienate property and enter into obligations allowed by law. 3) The law establishes severe punishments for all persons, not excluding the next of kin: 'which force a woman to marry against her will, or before she reaches the legal age. Equally, the law punishes the payment of kalym, the kidnapping of a woman to marry her, and polygamy — these are remnants of the age-old oppression of women that stand in the way of her cultural and political development. 4) Having put an end to the bourgeois division of children into legal and illegal, Soviet the power ensures their complete equality and gives the woman the right to demand from the father of the children she has born to them materially, regardless of whether these children are born in a registered or unregistered marriage. At the same time, striving to come to the aid of the toiler of the East in her care for children and to take measures to protect the health of the mother, the Soviet government calls on the population of the national republics and regions to organize new and support existing homes for mothers and children, nurseries, orphanages, colonies, obstetric centers, etc., providing them with comprehensive assistance and assistance from outside of all state bodies. By creating a network of schools and educational institutions that work in their native In the language, the Soviet government calls on the indigenous population of the national republics and regions to educate young people in the spirit of combating domestic prejudices that enslave women and to attract girls and girls, on an equal basis with male youth, to general and professional schools, clubs and other educational institutions as well as to pioneer and youth organizations. Recognizing that the realization of the full emancipation of a woman is achievable only through her gaining an independent economic position, the Soviet government calls on local public organizations to intensify efforts to involve women in production artels and local industry enterprises. Soviet government agencies, with the support of the entire conscious population, should help hard worker to become an active member of councils and executive committees, professional and cooperative organizations, self-help committees and other public organizations and get the opportunity, as a judge, lay judge, member of the college of defenders, or kurora, to take part in resolving issues related to the legal status of women. The Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR invites all Soviet bodies to widely inform the working women of the national republics and regions about the rights granted to them by the October Revolution and ways to combat violators of these rights established by Soviet law This resolution must be translated into the languages ​​of the peoples of the Soviet East, read at meetings of all village, aul, ulus and city councils, as well as at congresses and conferences, and posted in a conspicuous place in the buildings of all executive committees, Soviet institutions, schools and higher educational institutions ". One of the types of struggle of the Soviet power for the emancipation of the Circassian woman is the struggle against ancient customs through criminal punishment. In this regard, the Circassian woman finds full protection in the draft resolution of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee and the Council of People's Commissars of the RSFSR on supplementing the Criminal Code of the RSFSR with a new Chapter X on crimes that constitute the remnants of family life. Of the articles listed in this draft, the following are being put into effect for the Adyghe-Circassian Autonomous Region: “Payment of the bride price (kalym) made by the groom, his parents, relatives or relatives of the bridegroom, relatives or relatives of the bride, money, cattle or other property , or by personal labor - imprisonment or forced labor for a term of one year Ao. Acceptance of the ransom — the same measures and, regardless of the confiscation of the ransom, a fine in the amount of ransom. ”“ Forcing a woman to marry against her will through violence or threats, as well as kidnapping her for the same purpose — imprisonment for up to two years. The rape of the same woman committed in this case entails the measures provided for in 151 or 153 x) Art. Art. of this Code. ”“ Marrying a person who has not reached puberty, or being forced to enter into such a marriage — the measures provided for in Art. 151 of this Code * 2). "" Bigamy or polygamy — forced labor for up to one year or a fine of up to five hundred rubles. " The Soviet government recognized the complete equality of women with men. In no country does a woman enjoy the same rights as she received in the Soviet Union. These are the principal achievements of the Circassian woman in the Soviet Union. But, of course, for the successful implementation of these achievements, one cannot limit oneself to a simple declaration of women's rights. We must not forget that in the conditions of Circassian reality, one has to literally break open the doors of each saklya, sometimes tightly boarded up for a woman by age-old darkness and everyday traditions. In order to achieve the embodiment of new norms in social life and everyday life, or at least to paralyze the most painful manifestations of the old way of life, you need to put in a lot of work and patience, you need a whole cadre of persistent and knowledgeable workers, organized around a special apparatus. Since we are talking about work among women in Adygea, such an apparatus, as elsewhere in the USSR, is the women's department, and its workers are the advanced detachments of women themselves. But I must say that the work of the women's department in Adygea runs up against a number of difficulties that greatly weaken its activity. These difficulties, first of all, include the lack of a cadre of trained workers or women workers who are sufficiently closely connected with the local population and who can be used for active work among the female masses. However, in, during 1925 and 1926. work among women has advanced significantly. If until that time the creation of delegate meetings was thought of as a good wish, then in 1925 this was already implemented and there were over 550 delegates in the region, including 7 Circassian women. In 1926-27, the number of elected delegates reached 760 people, including 811 Circassians. In the same year, for the first time in the form of experience, delegates' meetings were created in the Circassian villages. Delegate meetings, if properly organized, will play the role of an initial school of social work for Circassian women. Methods of conducting educational and educational work among Circassian women have been found by organizing educational centers with training in needlework. Elimination of illiteracy among Circassian women is generally poor. This is due to both the inadequacy of the network of health centers and their overcrowding, and the still small consciousness of the Circassian women themselves. The involvement of Circassian women in health centers is very difficult because the old people forbid them to visit them. Despite this, in 1924 the letter of Fig. 2. Circassian delegates at the 1st regional congress of mountain women of the North Caucasus. 25 new Circassian women were trained. In 1925, there were 12 special centers for Circassian women, in which 180 were trained, and in 1926 there were already 18 such centers with 250 Circassian students. These health centers are remarkable in that the Circassian women who have passed through them feel a great urge to learn and the main contingent of students in the Circassian community school is made up of the past health centers. In addition, the network of other women's institutions is growing, such as: consultations, artels, Circassian houses, nurseries, etc. In quantitative terms, the work has grown significantly, now the main attention is paid to its qualitative strengthening. A special place is occupied by the protection of motherhood and infancy. Until now, there were no institutions of matmlad here at all, and the very idea has not yet penetrated the consciousness of the population. Therefore, work in this area began with consultations, as a form more accessible to the understanding of the population. In 1926-27 in Adygea, there were five consultations for infants and pregnant women. The main objective of these consultations is to combat child mortality and to instill in the population the skills to care for infants. But not everywhere this idea is being put into practice, since the population does not everywhere respond to the call to seek advice on medical issues. In 1925, a cable for a nursery was installed in the oblast, some of which were in the Circassian aul. As far as the idea of ​​a nursery is easily instilled in Russian villages, it turns out to be alien to the Circassian population: first of all, a Circassian woman is chained to her house and children and she does not need to send her children to a nursery; on the other hand, there are a number of conditions that prevent her from parting with children; their unusual food, being together with children of a different nationality, communication of a married Circassian woman with strangers, etc. On the other hand, the strong foundations of the population's conservatism oppose the activities of the women's department aimed at introducing a new way of life. Here is an example to illustrate this sufficiently. In 1925, the regional women's department, together with the regional health department, decided to set up a nursery in one of the villages, and for this purpose workers went there. But, alas, on the part of the population of this aul, especially the “honorable old men”, this good undertaking was met with distrustfulness. 3. A group of educational programs among Circassians at the Adyghe Communist Party School. Even a direct hostile attitude. It took a long time to persuade, explain, and, finally, we somehow collected 5-6 children. To instill more confidence in the nursery, they were placed in the house of one of the most respected Circassians in the village. When the nursery began to function, women began to gather in the sakla of the "respected old woman" every day - at first little by little, then more and more, at first they only approached the fence and looked through the crack, and then became more and more interested, and as a result, in the manger a few days later there were already 18-20 children. The nursery worker interviewed the mothers; In her free time, she held meetings with the farm laborers in the aul and made reports in the Komsomol cell. And so, when the time came to close the nursery, the Circassian women asked to leave them for the winter, saying that only now they saw how the Soviet government takes care of mountain women and their children, how it teaches women to raise children and raise them healthy. the experience of organizing nurseries in the region is of great interest and is of great importance in further instilling the ideas of matmlad and health care among the Circassian population. The matter of protecting matmlad and health is just emerging here. It is difficult to work among Circassian women. Nevertheless, next to the oppressed, downtrodden Circassian woman in Adygea, a new woman, a social activist, is already emerging. The main thing is that a shift has been made. The Circassian woman already knows that she is free; There are many cases when Circassian women themselves apply to the court with statements about their rights, divorce, etc., or to the women's department to protect their interests. During 1924-25, Circassian women independently filed 53 applications for divorce, including 4 due to their unwillingness to live with a husband, who is a criminal element. There is a large increase in the number of Circassian-shenok-narzassessatelits. In 1925, there were 78 of them, making up 4Оо / о to the total number of women-narrators. The participation of Circassian women in the elective bodies of Soviet power (especially in the lower bodies) is growing; Thus, the number of Circassian women-members of village councils, district executive committees and regional executive committees by year is presented in the following form: We have already mentioned that before the revolution the literate Circassian population was no more than Zo / O. In this respect, an even more bleak picture is observed among the female half of the Circassian population; here in 1924 the literacy rate among women was only 1.2-1.5o / o. Only the revolution gave a push to plant enlightenment among the broader masses of the population of the present Adyghe-Cherkessk region. Already in 1918, the Circassian primer was published. Since that time, in the Circassian schools, instruction in the first year began to be conducted in the native language, and in subsequent years in Russian. The number of schools in the villages began to grow rapidly, with the initiative in opening schools coming from the lower classes. A number of schools were often spontaneously opened, and by the 1921-22 academic year there were already 42 Circassian schools with 2.171 students, which is 21.7% / about the total number of Circassian schoolchildren. The number of girls studying in schools at that time was about 650. A more systematic and successful development of the national Circassian school began in 1922, when the Adygei-Circassian region was formed as an autonomous unit. New primary schools and various political and educational institutions are opened and a solid foundation is laid for vocational education. The school network and the number of students in Adygea grows from 1921 to 1926. visible from the following tables:
The region has a pedagogical college with 46 Circassian students, including 8 girls. The regional soviet school has 44 Circassian women within its walls. In 1925, three Circassian women from the Soviet Union were sent to the Rostov Soviet Union. There are also Circassian students at the workers' schools and universities in the mountains. Moscow and others. Along with all this, there is continuous work through the clubs of mountain women, regional and mobile libraries, reading huts, vocational schools, cinema travels, and so on. This is how enlightenment spreads among the Circassian population. Unrelenting work in this area is the main guarantee for the eradication of the age-old routine, old traditions and customs, which are still so strongly constraining the Circassian woman on the way to cultural progress.