1. General outline of the TSSR
Turkmen Owl Social The republic or Turkmenistan is one of the six republics that make up the USSR. It occupies the southwestern part of our Central Asia and is bordered in the north by the Autonomous Kazan Sov. Social Republic and Autonomous Karakalpak Region, in the east - from the Uzbek Sov. Social The republic, in the south, with Afghanistan and Persia, and in the west, its shores are washed by the waters of the Caspian Sea. In terms of its size, the TSSR is equal to 4, / 5 of the surface of France, with an area of ​​435 thousand square meters. km., while its population reaches barely one million people.Turkmenistan lies in the southwestern corner of the vast Turan lowland, stretching east of the Caspian Sea, then forming the boundless Kyrgyz steppes and further passing into the steppes of southern Siberia. Only in the south-west and along the southern edge of Turkmenistan are relatively low mountains, and the rest of the country is filled with sandy and clay deserts and steppes and salt marshes. Sandy deserts occupy slightly less than three quarters of the entire surface of Turkmenistan. The desert does not have the same appearance everywhere, the most characteristic places are covered with moving sandy sands. From a distance they resemble the sea with the waves frozen in motion. At the slightest wind, the sand begins to smoke and move. The moving sands, during their continuous wandering, sometimes covered entire villages, cities and populated areas. Sometimes the desert is filled with sandy hillocks or ridges parallel to each other, but unlike dunes, these sands are more or less fastened together by a kind of desert vegetation: saxaul, thorns, tamarisk and other plants that are unpretentious in terms of moisture. In many places, especially in the southeast, there are sandy steppes. During the two spring months, they are decorated with a lush carpet of bright wildflowers, and during the rest of the year they are barren plains, covered with burnt yellow grass and partly only with more hardy plants, like thorns, etc. But in some places the desert bursts in here, even in its own the most dead form — in the form of dunes. In the center of the TSSR, there are the famous Kara-Kum sands, which filled the entire inner part of the country, stretching for several hundred kilometers from west to east. In sharp contrast to the deserts are the so-called oases, places that have enough water and in which sedentary life is concentrated. After many days of traveling through the dead, waterless sandy desert with rare Turkmen nomads scattered near the wells, the oasis with the greenery of its gardens and fields, the waters of rivers and canals and a dense sedentary population makes an exceptionally strong impression. Of the large rivers, there is only Amu-Darya, and even that is located at the eastern border of the republic; in the west, the river, bordering with Persia, flows into the Caspian Sea. Atrek; the rivers Tejen and Mur-gab flow from south to north, but they and their tributaries are full only in spring, and in summer they almost completely dry up. The population [image of map] in the absence of more, has to be content with the water of these rivers and mountain streams, where they are. The situation is bad with drinking water inside the country: there are few wells, they often have tasteless, salty and unhealthy water, at the same time, little precipitation (rain and snow) falls, especially in the desert and steppe inland regions, as a result of which nomadic livestock can stay on the grazing in the winter. The country's climate is affected, on the one hand, by its southern position (the southernmost point of Turkmenistan is at the same time the southernmost point of the USSR), and, on the other, by its internal position on the mainland; as a result, the temperature fluctuates sharply. Vegetation depends only on irrigation, and with sufficient moisture it is very rich, and instead of saxaul and desert thorns in the oases, rice, cotton and various southern fruit trees grow in abundance. Dependence on moisture can be observed in Turkmenistan also in the animal world, which is richest in well-irrigated areas. An amateur hunter of large predators can even find a Bengal tiger in the thickets of rivers, not to mention a wild boar, and in the mountains - a leopard and a hyena. Turkmenistan has not yet been sufficiently researched with respect to its mineral resources. If until now their presence was known mainly in the Krasnovodsk region, such as: rock and self-precipitated salt, Glauber's salt, and on the Cheleken island - oil and various products of petroleum origin and other minerals (gypsum, coal), then Scientific research of the country has revealed its richness in other minerals, especially sulfur, which is found in large quantities in Kara-Kum - 250 kilometers north of Ashgabat. The huge territory of the CCP has only 1.030 thousand people, mainly Turkmen (77%), Uzbeks, Russians, Persians, Cossacks and representatives of other peoples. Turkmens belong to the Turkic family of peoples, and their closest relatives by blood are the Turks and the Azerbaijani Turks. Not all Turkmens live within the T S S R; they are also found in Uzbekistan, Kazakstan, part of them, the Stavropol Turk-Ris. 1. A group of Turkmen before the kibitkoy.] exchange, 200-300 years ago, they settled in the steppe north of the Caucasus, where they are now allocated to a special Turkmen region; there are also Turkmens in the Batum region and in the Crimea, but incomparably more of them are outside the USSR — in Persia, in its northeastern corner and south of the Atrek River, and in Afghanistan. In addition, about one hundred thousand Turkmens wander in Turkey, who left the borders of Central Asia several centuries ago. It is impossible to speak of the Turkmens as something homogeneous, as a people who preserved themselves from the effects of the environment. Living in different economic conditions and submitting to the influence of various neighboring peoples, the Turkmen tribes little by little acquired a number of physical, moral, cultural and everyday differences. However, the common origin, the consciousness of it by the Turkmen of different tribes, the division into tribes that persisted for centuries, regardless of the way of life and subordination to one or another state, as well as the clan system with common features, which still exists to a greater or lesser extent, and the common spiritual culture make it possible to consider all Turkmen tribes as a single nation. Particular attention is drawn to the clan structure of the Turkmen - a living relic of bygone times. Wandering in the boundless steppes of Central Asia, not dependent on anyone, but at the same time left to themselves in the matter of self-defense and the search for means of subsistence, the Turkmens were forced by life itself to a form of social cooperation known as the clan system. The main social unit is the family (a wagon, on average 4-5 people), which in its inner life does not depend on anyone; a number of male-related families form the next stage of connection — a community (for a sedentary and semi-sedentary population — a village, aul). Communities live completely independently, common affairs are decided by the whole community, and current affairs are decided by elected officials. In the absence of any privileges and general equality, the leading role is usually played by smart and energetic people. There are no princes and the title of khan was given for merit. The exit from the community is free. In case of need (war, etc.), communities merged into the following larger tribal divisions: tribes, clans and tribes. The tribe is the last degree of tribal unity; the largest of them are the following: Teke (Teke), Yomuds, Salors, Saryks, Goklans, Chaudors, Ersari, Imrels, etc., it is interesting to note that some tribes, due to the artificially drawn political border, ended up part of Russia (now in the USSR ), partly in Persia (Yomud). The absence of laws and authorities still could not free the Turkmens from the existence of a whole vast body of unwritten law that would protect personal rights, property, interests of the family, community, clan, etc. Life itself has developed the laws of customary law (adat), which governs the whole the life of the Turkmen and regulates it to the smallest detail. However, reflecting the cultural state and views of its environment, customary law, creating an internal order in society, has a lot of both cruel and uncivilized from our point of view. Customary law requires unquestioning self-submission; the one who does not obey him goes against society and therefore loses the right to protection on its part, and to be defenseless and not to have the support of his kind means to perish. It is not for nothing that the popular Turkmen wisdom threatens: "who does not fulfill the precepts of the ancestors, howl." On the contrary, relatives should always help each other; everyone's business is a common business. This explains the absence of begging among the Turkmen. On the other hand, a strict account of the degree of kinship is kept, the Turkmen value their ancestry, and each of them knows the name of the last degree of his tribal division (clan, its separation) and tribe. Since there are no courts and no punishments and there would be no one to carry them out, then retribution is the same for a criminal or civil crime is the payment of a known value to the victim. In disputed cases, they resort to arbitration, collecting respected people for this, however, their decisions are not binding on the parties. If the arbitration court is not addressed, or is not satisfied with it, then sometimes they resort to personal punishment, followed by bloody revenge. If the killer escaped, they take revenge on his brothers, relatives and his closest family up to the seventh generation. Each new murder brings a new revenge; mass destruction is created. Bloody revenge is one of the most brutal common law laws. Fortunately, the Turkmens try to avoid it by all means. However, equality among community members was not always and not always maintained. In some areas, especially within the former Khiva and Bukhara, countries that retained their eastern despotic way of life prior to their Sovietization, Turkmen tribal chiefs - feudal lords - acquired power over the local Turkmen population, who collected significant land wealth and huge herds of cattle. However, as a general rule, the Turkmens always put personal freedom and independence above all else, and only a harsh necessity unites them together. The demands of life and the environment have left a deep imprint on all life and life. comfortable way of life of the Turkmen. It is not for nothing that the Turkmen are most attached to their horse, sometimes an irreplaceable and only friend in the dead desert. Constant life among nature developed in the Turkmen submission to its laws and fatalism, on the other hand, the poverty of nature did not give much food for the development of his spiritual life. The Turkmens, who were previously only nomads, little by little settle on the earth, and now in the TSSR they are found in the form of a sedentary population, nomads and semi-nomads — in the summer of farmers, in the winter of nomads. In nomads, each tribe, clan and tribe has a certain [Fig. 2 Turkmen aul.] A territory for nomadism, while the customary law does not allow violating the accepted boundaries. Also, semi-nomads have certain places for nomads. Turkmens, transitioning to a settled life, continue to live in the same wagon as nomads, and only in places with strong outside influence (for example, Russians) the wagon is replaced by a house. Simultaneously with settling on the land, more and more Turkmens pass from cattle breeding to agriculture, the main occupation of the TSSR population. However, several decades ago and earlier in Turkmenistan, the Alamans, predatory raids on neighbors by the Tekins and other Turkmen tribes, played a known role in enriching the population. Alamans and robbers created the glory of daring and fearless robbers far around the Turkmens. For the population of some Turkmen oases, robberies and raids, mainly in the neighboring regions of Persia, where hundreds of villages were ravaged by them, and the entire border region was little - by little depopulated, was a craft from which they lived, and agriculture and cattle breeding were only subsidiary The main prey were the people whom the Turkmens sold through dealers to the slave markets of Central Asia. Since the TSSR, despite its southern position and soil fertility in the oases, is very poor in water, this poverty is the main obstacle to the development of agriculture. Sowing for rain (rain-fed) is possible only in the foothill regions, where rain falls much more than on the flat parts of the country. However, there are very few such lands (about 2 ° / 0 of the entire cultivated area). Therefore, the issue of artificial irrigation (irrigation) has always played a very important role within the TSSR. Even in ancient times, the oases of the present TSSR were densely cut by entire systems of irrigation structures, traces of which are now found in many places, now abandoned and deserted. Of the oases, the largest are the following: Akhal-Tekinsky, which stretches for 240 kilometers, lengths in the form of a narrow ribbon from Kyzyl-Arvat to Ashgabat, further to the east — Ateksky, along the Tejenu-Tezhensky river and further to the south — Serakhsky, along the Mur-gabu river— Mervsky in the north, further to the south Iolatansky and Pendinsky even further south along the river. Under Soviet rule, especially after the National Delimitation of Central Asia, much attention was paid to the irrigation in the TSSR, the republic's needs for water were studied, much has already been done, much is provided for by the irrigation plan. A number of canals, dams and other similar structures have already been built. Thanks to this, in 2 years the sown area increased by 20%, and if in the first year of the republic's existence 682 thousand rubles were allocated for irrigation, then in the next year (1926-27) it was already 4.5 million rubles. The main crops in the TSSR are: wheat, cotton (along the Tejen and Murghab rivers), corn, dzhugara, barley, oats and rice. Cotton cultivation in the TSSR is developing from year to year; this is achieved not only by increasing the area under its crops, but also by a number of agronomic and economic measures. Support and development of cotton growing in the TSSR, as in all other cotton-growing regions of the USSR, is also dictated by the USSR's desire to free itself from dependence on the West and America in supplying our industry with this important type of raw material. As for horticulture and viticulture, they, having large opportunities are not yet sufficiently developed. Sericulture is widespread in the Ashgabat region; in the TSSR, 15% of the total population is exclusively engaged in cattle breeding. Cattle breeders have fat-tailed sheep most of all, then goats, astrakhan sheep, then horses, cattle, camels, donkeys. Of the total 3.5 mln. head of livestock on the territory of the sands accounts for more than 2.7 million. heads. However, in general, the state of the cattle-breeding economy is difficult; it is carried out in an uncultured way, in the old-fashioned way and for the owners it turns out to be of little benefit. The TSSR is not an exclusively agricultural country; the industry that already exists here, despite its small size, has every reason to develop rapidly. The availability of its own raw materials (cotton, wool, leather, sulfur, oil) and remoteness from the center of industrial life of the USSR, as well as the need to strengthen the role of the local Turkmen proletariat, all this leads to the development of local industry. In the extractive industry, the first place is taken by the extraction of oil products in Cheleken island; there are also ozokerite fields; mined salt, stone corner and others. The main part of the workers is employed in the railway. workshops of the Transcaspian railway roads crossing the TSSR from west to east, from Krasnovodsk, the main port on the Caspian Sea, to the border of Uzbekistan in the east. On the two-year anniversary of the proclamation of the TSSR, a textile factory for 10 thousand spindles and a silk-winding plant were laid in Ashgabat. Other factories and factories in various industries operate on a rather modest scale. The needs of the local aul and nomadic population are largely met by handicrafts. For centuries, the Turkmens wandered in the steppes of the Trans-Caspian or occupied its oases, until Russia turned its gaze on these areas.The conquest of the Trans-Caspian is one of the parts of the Russian conquest of Central Asia, and this in turn is part of Russia's movement to the East in the 19th and 20th centuries. .c.In the Transcaspian region, Russia first became a firm foot in 1869 from the founding of Krasnovodsk, and then for 10 years further penetration to the east was prepared. Part of the Turkmens submitted to the conquerors, while the other, especially the Tekins of the Akhal-Teke oasis, began stubbornly fighting for their independence. All these ten years are filled with continuous collision In the late 70s, the Russians decided to conquer the Akhal-Tekinsky oasis, the center of the entire Transcaspian region. The first campaign in 1879 ended unsuccessfully for the Russians, so they were recaptured from the Geok-Tepe fortress (not far from present-day Ashgabat) and forced to retreat to the Caspian Sea. The news of this victory spread widely throughout Turkmenistan, but the jubilation was short-lived. The St. Petersburg government instructed the famous General Skobelev to make amends for this defeat and break the rebellious Tekins. A carefully prepared and skilfully conducted expedition ended successfully for the Russians. On January 12, 1881, Geok-Tepe was taken, despite the desperate resistance of the Turkmen, and this dealt the main and final blow to the independence of the Tekins and other Turkmen tribes. Memories of this fateful day are still alive among the Tekins. Soon the rest of the former Trans-Caspian region was occupied and, thus, the conquest of Central Asia was completed The system of Russian government, as before, tried to bring discord and division into the Turkmen population. The Russians strove to win over kulak-bays, khans and leaders to their side, bribing them by preserving the former and granting new privileges, ranks, orders, etc. Sometimes the bais and khans themselves, with flattery and sycophancy, hurried to earn the mercy of the victors. At the same time, severe measures awaited all unreliable and rebellious - imprisonment, exile, deportation to Russia, extradition of hostages, etc. The Japanese war gave impetus to awakening national consciousness among the Turkmen bourgeois elements and opened their eyes to the groundlessness of the opinion about the invincibility of Russia. During the World War, when an attempt was made to mobilize, an uprising took place among the indigenous population of Central Asia, the movement also captured Turkmenistan in two regions: agrarian clashes took place in the Merv-Tejen area and partisan attacks on Russians took place, and in the southwestern part of Turkmenistan on the border with Persia it came to open. the wars of the Yomuds with the Russians. Here, a punitive expedition of 15 thousand troops acted against the Turkmens, moreover, well equipped technically. The struggle took place both within Russia and in Persia, where the Russians ruled like at home. They beat the peaceful Yomud population, burned wagons, destroyed crops, captured livestock, robbed, and committed atrocities. The entire Yomud population along Atrek went to Persia and only after the revolution of 1917 returned back. This expedition greatly contributed to the deterioration of relations between the Turkmens and the Russians and left a deep mark on the Yomuds. Turkmen mothers frightened their children that "Madritov would come" (general, head of the expedition). The February revolution in the Caspian Sea took place without affecting the broad masses of the indigenous population, but among the representatives of two classes of Turkmen: the remnants of the feudal lords, inspired by the reactionary clergy, and the national-bourgeois the Democrats began to feud. Since the working element in the cities was weak, and besides, it was not connected through the Turkmen workers with the aul, and in the cities there was a dominance of the bureaucracy and the bourgeoisie, the Soviet power, which was established after October, fell in the summer of 1918, and was replaced by came the SS-era counter-revolutionary Transcaspian provisional government, which also relied on the Turkmen bourgeois circles. The subsequent British intervention, the main purpose of which was to assist the counter-revolution in its struggle against the Bolsheviks and to create a buffer between revolutionary Russia and the British possessions and the countries of the East subject to England, had the result that the British, welcomed by the trans-Caspian counter-revolution that relied on them, , became the de facto rulers of Turkmenistan. The ever increasing reaction led to the fact that the white government in Ashgabat lost support from the city, the nationalists lost influence among the Turkmens, and the broad masses of the dekhkans began to understand that the struggle against the Bolsheviks was directed against the interests of the dekhkans themselves. After the subsequent withdrawal of the British from the Caspian Sea, the balance at the front was upset, and as a result of the successful offensive of the Red Army, Ashgabat became Soviet again on July 9, 1919. Liberated from the British and Whites, Turkmenistan, entering the Turkestan Sov. Social The republic did not yet cover all regions of Central Asia with a Turkmen population, and this task was almost completed by the National demarcation of Central Asia and the proclamation of the Turkmen SSR on February 25, 1925. The new republic was formed from the Turkmen region of Turk. SSR, as well as from parts of Bukhara, Khorezm (Khiva) and the Kazak (formerly Kirghiz) republic and entered the USSR as an equal member together with the Russian Federation, Ukraine, Belarus, the Transcaucasian Federation and Uzbekistan. The city of Poltoratsk (now called Ashgabat), the largest center of the country, was declared the capital of the new republic. Although much has already been achieved in building Soviet power after the final reconciliation of the country, after the expulsion of the Whites and the destruction of all traces of Basmachism, especially noticeable successes achieved only after the national demarcation of Central Asia and the creation of the TSSR, when the planned Sovietization of the country and its unification into a single state whole became possible. It should not be forgotten that before the Russian conquest, the Turkmen actually did not know any power over themselves, and each tribe and clan lived completely independently, and within the clans the khan] had no great rights. Also, after the Russian conquest, areas farther from the administrative and cultural centers, especially the female cattle breeding areas, remained, due to their inaccessibility, completely or almost completely independent. In the northeastern outskirts of the TSSR, to this day, a well-known role is played by the feudal leaders, who only gradually completely submitted to Soviet power. Some inland areas have not yet been sufficiently explored and even last year in Kara-Kum by a geological expedition, just like the land. Within the clan division, land and water were divided into household-hereditary (mulk) and communal (sanashik) with an annual redistribution; the allotment was given only to married people, thanks to which the rich tried as soon as possible to get their son engaged and get land and water for him. During redistributions, due to the pursuit of justice, a very large strip of land and far-away land turned out, as a result of which many farmers abandoned their land or leased it, and the land hereditary homesteads meanwhile turned into property and were concentrated in few hands. As a result of all this, the number of landless, land-poor, tenants and large landowners grew. In addition, some clans had a lot of land and water, others had little. At the end of 1925, the Central Executive Committee of the TSSR decided to carry out a reform first in two districts of the TSSR, and then it covered other parts of the republic. The results of the reform are as follows: in places with a sedentary population, a strong blow has been dealt to the clan system, since labor land use has been put in place of the clan; a certain land area and water sources are assigned to each aul, and each farm has been given allotments of land and water to the hereditary household. Thus, the Turkmen aul ceases to be an exclusively generic unit and becomes an economic unit, and an irreparable blow is inflicted on blood relations. At the same time, the marriage rights to land and water have been destroyed. Several thousand landless Dekhkan farms received land and water, another several thousand farms were given a cut at the expense of kulaks and multi-land, in which the size of the land was reduced to the established norm. As a result of all the previous measures, especially the land and water reform, the poor and middle peasant strata of the dekhkanstvo were finally and firmly won over to their side by the Soviet government, which is viewed by these strata of dekhkans as the expression of their will and interests. An important role in Soviet construction in the auls is played by the "Koshchi" union - the unification of the rural poor and farm laborers, led by party organizations. The class policy of the Soviet government is directed against tribal survivals and tribal division of the working population, and economic measures are the best ways to combat them. The development of industry in the TSSR will lead to the growth of the local Turkmen proletariat, which, although continuously growing in number, is still small and reaches only 13.2% with a total number of the proletariat of about 11 thousand people, concentrated mainly in several points (Ashgabat, Krasnovodsk , Kyzyl-Arvat, New Chardzhui, Merv) and mainly consisting of Russians. Therefore, one of the main tasks of the party is to create a sufficiently strong indigenous proletarian active. In the TSSR, the cities are not purely Turkmen, but rather even Russian; this is explained by historical reasons, since the cities were built by the Russians as strongholds of their dominion over the country. On the other hand, the Turkmen did not have their own intelligentsia, as a result of which in representatives of the non-indigenous population of the country took a significant part in the construction of the young Turkmen republic. However, the indigenization of the Soviet apparatus is going well and more than 28% of the Turkmens are already working in it. Enormous tasks are facing the Soviet government in the matter of the people's and cultural education of the TSSR and in the matter of health care. Before the October Revolution, the Turkmen did not have a national secular school at all, there were either Russian-Turkmen or Muslim religious schools. With the establishment of Soviet power, especially after the formation of a separate Turkmen republic, the People's Commissariat of Education faced the task of eliminating illiteracy and spreading education in the country; while on the part of the population there is a feverish impulse to learn. For three years (since 1924) the number of students has increased 4 times; now there are not enough schools for everyone who wants to study. A number of special technical schools and pedagogical institutes have been opened in Ashgabat and other cities, which should give Turkmenistan its indigenous cultural strength. The Turkmen Scientific Research Institute was opened, with the goal of a comprehensive study of the TSSR. Great tasks were faced by the Turkmen language, which now has to serve not a poor nomad, but the people set by the October Revolution on a par with the most cultured peoples of the USSR. The inconvenient Arabic alphabet was replaced by the Latin alphabet, which is also accepted by other Turkic peoples of the USSR. Condemned under the old regime to physical and moral extinction, the Turkmen nation began to awaken and develop.
2. The position of women in Turkmenistan before Soviet power
The custom, which guided all aspects of Turkmen life, gives way to a new way of life only in the most sovietized places — the farther from the centers, the stronger its dominance; therefore, family life in general and the position of a Turkmen woman remain the same in many parts of the TSSR as they were before. Although the Turkmens are Muslims, the laws of "Sharia", Muslim legislation based on the Koran and covering the entire everyday and economic life of the followers of Mohammed, are applied only in some cases, and in all other respects adat prevails, a common law that puts a woman in an even worse position. than Sharia. Common law does not recognize the equality of men and women, and a woman feels this law from childhood to the end of her life. The entire everyday life in all its little things shows this inequality. Turkmen love children very much, but nevertheless the birth of a daughter takes place in a Turkmen family imperceptibly, while the birth of a boy is a joyful event in the family, which is celebrated with a noisy celebration. The newborn is in a hurry to give at least a temporary name, and it is necessary to have time to do this before sunset. The name is given by the father and not only in Arabic; it is often the time and circumstances of the child's birth are characterized, for example, "Gun Dogdy", ie "The day has come", "Ogul Terek" - "We need a son" , (this name is given if there were several girls in a row), "Anna Gul" - "Flower of Friday" (festive), "Kyzyl Gul" - "Red flower", etc. The child grows up under the guidance of his mother, plays together with his brothers, but already from the first glimpses of consciousness he begins to feel that the boys enjoy more rights and attention in the family than he does. Girls are plant-based — no attention is paid to their mental development and literacy training. At the same time, from childhood they begin to teach them to help their mother in her various jobs, preparing them for their future working life. From the age of nine, the lifestyle of a Turkmen girl changes. She is no longer considered a child, she is now — according to Turkmen concepts — becoming an adult, her marriageable age has come, and she can be given in marriage. She is removed from children's games with boys, and she is forced to spend all the time in women's society, more and more involved in housework or devoting time to making handicrafts, such as carpets, which will go to her as a dowry. In Turkmen, marriage is a commercial transaction between parents. or guardians of young people, without any participation or consent on their part. At its conclusion, a typical bargaining is conducted, as with any purchase and sale. The girl's father (guardians) is trying to bargain for the largest possible "kalym", that is, payment for the bride. Kalym comes at their disposal, and the infusion of significant funds into the house allows either to improve their economy or to live without difficulty for some time. Kalym has grown continuously over the past decades, reaching very significant sizes for Turkmenistan, several hundred rubles, and sometimes going over a thousand. The age of 13-24 is especially highly valued; girls younger and older than this age, as well as widows, are cheaper. The reason for the growth and large size of the kalym was primarily the inequality between the number of women and men: in Turkmenistan there are and were fewer women than men. The high kalym forced the majority of young Turkmens, who did not have large and wealthy relatives who could help them, spend a number of years in hard work in order to accumulate funds for the kalym, and often put them in bondage dependence on their future father-in-law. While the more prosperous Turkmen could buy several wives, some of the poorer had to remain celibate due to the above two reasons. To avoid paying kalym, young people sometimes resort to kidnapping a girl by prior agreement with her or not, and then the matter has to be settled through people respected in the aul, since otherwise everything may end in bloody revenge on the part of the kidnapped relatives. The age of marriage for a girl is usually 10-15 years, although sometimes marriages are concluded starting from 8 years. Such early marriages are caused by the desire of the father (guardians) to receive a kalym as soon as possible, to enable the son-in-law to pay the full amount before the onset of majority and to receive the right to use shares of public water and land. Usually a Turkmen woman marries prematurely, even before her body is fully ripe, and although early marriages, starting from the age of 8, are fictitious, denoting only a marriage engagement and a donation of a kalym deposit, a certain part of such marriages is actually carried out and leads to maiming of the female body. This partly explains such a wide spread of female diseases among the Turkmen women. Wedding customs are different among different tribes, but nevertheless they have a number of common features. After preliminary negotiations, several respected old men go to her parents for a bride, who pay part of the kalym in money and cattle and bring her to the groom's aul. In some areas of Turkmenistan, they arrange a humorous kidnapping of nevaTells: several dozen horsemen rush in and grab her, a fight of the parties takes place, then the pursuit of the kidnappers. The bride brought to the aul is placed in a specially prepared wagon, while the scenes of the struggle between the relatives accompanying the bride and the groom's supporters are again played out. According to Muslim views, marriage is not given religious significance, and it is considered only a legal act, therefore the marriage ceremony does not play a big role and can be performed not only by a mullah, but also by every literate Turkmen. On the evening of the wedding day, a feast is held in the father-in-law's wagon, to which all relatives and friends are invited, but the young are absent. Guests are treated to pilaf, tea, rich chureks (Turkmen bread), delicacies. The richer the groom's family, the more abundant and crowded the treat. Singers (bakhshi) are invited, however, dances and music are absent, and this gives a peculiar touch to the whole celebration. The next day there are races, wrestling, running, target shooting, etc. Winners receive prizes in the form of robes or pieces of paper fabric. In the next few days, treats and competitions continue. When a Turkmen woman gets married, her costume changes, and now it consists of a red silk or motley paper long shirt and pants, narrowly covering the leg above the ankle, then from a paper or silk striped short robe. On the head is a traditional high Turkmen headdress, the so-called sommok, which has special differences and is uniquely decorated in each locality and for each tribe: it is a high felt hood, wrapped in silk scarves and decorated with silver buckles, then several layers of silk kokoshniks, sometimes it is covered with silver badges, and sometimes he has a beaded garter that goes down under the chin. Unlike Uzbek women and Sart women, Turkmen women do not hide their faces, since life in the desert and constant care for the house and over carpets, as well as the weak influence of Islam did not allow this custom to be established. A light shawl is worn on top of the sommok, however, sometimes the sommok, especially among older women, is absent and is replaced by a shawl. Woolen socks and mules are worn on the feet. The chest of the shirt is hung with silver cups, plaques, and pendants. In addition, jewelry is worn on the forehead, in the form of a silver forehead, heavy silver bracelets on the hands, etc. Rich Turkmen women wear a valuable dressing gown embroidered with silk and various expensive collars, bibs, pendants and other silver jewelry. The costume remains unchanged all year round; a wadded robe is added in winter; Women do not wear fur coats. After the wedding, the wife stays with her husband for several days, not daring to leave the wagon, and then either is introduced into a new family, where she is immediately put to work, or returns to her father or guardians, where she lives until full payment for it kalym, and this can take several years. Before marriage, a Turkmen woman belongs, as alienable property, to her father or guardian, usually an older relative, who, at their own discretion, sell her and appropriate the payment received for her — kalym. Now, in marriage, she belongs to her husband, who sees her as bought at a price. It’s also good if a girl marries a young Turkmen, to whom she is the first wife; the situation is sometimes much worse, since there may be a difference of several decades between the spouses, or the husband may already have 2-3 wives, who, of course, will not meet their new rival amiably. Although in practice, as a general rule, monogamy existed and exists among the Turkmens, Islam allows its followers to have up to four legitimate wives and an unlimited number of concubines, but only wealthy people enjoyed this right. The rich put each wife in a special kibitka, and the less prosperous— all in one wagon, together with all the children. In a Turkmen family, all household work is usually divided in this way: the man is responsible for cultivating the land (for the sedentary and semi-sedentary population) and caring for the horses, which the Turkmen will not entrust to anyone; the herds are entrusted to hired shepherds, and the rest of the work falls on the women. Thus, a Turkmen woman has to manage her entire household (including: grinding grain into flour in primitive hand mills), looking after children, sheathe a family, spinning and weaving, breaking and disassembling a wagon when moving to another place. The time not occupied by these works is given to making various handicrafts, especially carpets. With very few exceptions, all Turkmen women are engaged in carpet weaving. Turkmen carpets are the best and most famous among the carpets made in Central Asia. For a long time they have been famous for the durability of fabrics and colors, softness and warmth of tones and the correctness of their designs, and often these are real art. [Figure 3. A Turkmen woman with her daughter.] Works of art. The most valuable carpets are produced in the Pendinsky region, where famous carpets from ancient times are woven. with drawings "Sa-lor-Gul" (Salor rose). Carpet production is a sensitive support in the family budget, and there is even a Turkmen proverb: "a woman who does not know how to weave a carpet should not eat." The more varied and artistic the carpets that a girl knows how to weave, the more she is valued as a bride, and the price for her grows, for example, from the number of types of "Salor rose" that she knows. Weaving carpets is very slow (for a season of 5-6 months only 2-2% of a square meter), painstaking and tedious work. The weaver herself prepares and dyes the wool. One has to work on primitive machines, sitting on the ground in an uncomfortable position. In general, this work is not very profitable, since on average it is possible to gain 40-20 rubles per square meter. A number of techniques and secrets of carpet making are usually passed from mother to daughter in secret. Despite her role in the household, a Turkmen woman, as a general rule, is not a full member of the family. True, she is consulted in every major family matter, she is trusted with domestic values, but men look at her as an inferior creature and unequal to themselves. The woman is bought and is therefore primarily considered property. It is true that the position of the Turkmen is better, and she enjoys greater freedom than her sisters in Central Asia — Uzbeks, Sartyans and Tajiks. Even if she plays a prominent role in the family, then she is not allowed to take part in the conversations of men or in the discussion of public issues. However, it is known that, as a rare exception, individual Turkmen women, thanks to their intelligence and personal qualities, nevertheless played an outstanding role in public life. The folk art of the Turkmen reflected in itself such an attitude towards a woman in the sayings: “the hair of women is long, the mind is short ”,“ a woman without a husband is like a horse without a bridle ”, and advice is given on how to handle her:“ if your wife is a fool, let your whip be fat. ”Ordinary law recognizes only some of the duties of a husband in relation to his wife, including maintaining a wife, and if there are several wives, then 'all are the same. The wife, however, has no property rights in the family, and everything is considered the property of the husband. At the same time, customary law places the wife at the complete disposal of her husband, who in certain cases may even kill her. According to customary law, a divorce is possible by mutual agreement of the spouses or at the request of the husband, for which it is enough to pronounce the formula “talak” three times in front of witnesses, while the wife can never dissolve the marriage if all the customary rules were observed during its conclusion. In the past, divorce was very rare. In case of divorce, leaving her husband, the wife is allowed to take only the most necessary things with her, such as: one shirt, one pants, one headdress and a scarf; that's all, regardless of the husband's wealth. Children remain with the father, except for the infants, but at the end of the period of feeding, they must also be returned to the father.On one suspicion of treason, customary law allows the husband to torture his wife, and for treason and kill her with impunity. A woman cannot return to her father, leave her husband, since she has become his property; her husband could demand the return of his property in court. The inequality of a woman with a man was reflected, for example, in the fact that when a woman was killed, only half of the ransom paid for the murder of a man was paid for the murder of a woman. And so, if a Turkmen woman is fresh, healthy and strong before marriage, then the transition to her husband's wagon little by little leaves a strong imprint on her from the hard and continuous work, illness and mistreatment of her husband, as a result of which she quickly begins to fade and age. If the husband is rich, then new wives come to replace her. At the same time, the entire age-old way of life could not but leave its mark on a Turkmen woman, contributing to the development of all character traits that are developed during humiliation and constant work, for example, how lazy are developed in men and aversion to work, so the woman is hardworking and persistent in work. At the same time, the delicate artistic taste that is found in the carpets, fabrics and other products she makes, puts her in this respect incomparably higher than men; their works are crude and devoid of any artistry. Among the negative qualities of a Turkmen woman, one should note sloppiness in their clothes and appearance and untidiness. All the coquetry in clothes is manifested only in the wearing of silver jewelry. In general, the Turkmen have highly developed prejudices and superstitions, especially fertile ground for their spread they find among women. All evil, all diseases are considered to come from evil spirits, therefore, for example, the sick are treated by reprimanding and casting out the evil spirit. An eyewitness reports how a woman, sick with hysteria and neurasthenia, was chained by her husband in a barn and chained to a stake in order to expel the evil spirit from her; for this they beat her every day with the chanting of prayers and almost completely finished off — she went mad. The spread of superstition and prejudice is understandable; if men's education was at a very low level
3. The position of women in Turkmenistan under Soviet rule
As a result of the October Revolution, the old economic relations in Turkmenistan were dealt a terrible blow; The clan system, which for centuries performed its business of preserving the Turkmen people, thanks to the economic measures of the Soviet power (land and water reform, etc.), was shaken to the ground among the sedentary population of the TSSR. The bourgeoisie and feudal lords were pushed back and gave way to the working population. The right of custom is replaced by Soviet law. The same is happening with Islam, with its Sharia. The foundations of the old Turkmen system are being broken, a new Soviet life is taking its place, and, of course, the rapid growth of culture is impossible and it is impossible to catch up with other more cultured peoples as long as the Turkmen woman remains in her former slave position. Therefore, as the Soviet power in Central Asia was consolidated, little by little, the liberation of the toiler of Turkmenistan began to take place. With the national demarcation of Central Asia, with the beginning of the nation-building of new republics, the women's issue received more attention, and the work to emancipate the Turkmen woman also went ahead with faster steps. At the Constituent Congress of Soviets of Turkmenistan, which took place in February 1925, the declaration on the formation of the TSSR proclaimed: "Recognizing full equal rights for a woman, the TSSR takes all measures to eliminate all living conditions that are in the nature of restricting women's rights." The session of the Central Executive Committee of the TSSR in October 1926 adopted decrees on kalym, divorce, on the prohibition of polygamy and the marriage of minors Also, the 2nd Congress of Soviets of the TSSR devoted much attention to the cause of the emancipation of women and addressed a special appeal to the women of Turkmenistan on specific measures The leadership of all work in this area belongs to the women's department of the Central Committee of the CPT (b) and the Commission for improving the living conditions of workers at the Central Executive Committee of the TSSR. Work among women has been severely hindered and is still hindered by the lack of Turkmen party women’s forces. However, there are already tremendous achievements in this area, which suggest that the task of involving a Turkmen woman in the party is well established. The time has passed when there was not a single Turkmen woman among the female party activists, now there are more than 30 of them, that is, about 6% of the total party composition of the TSSR. At the same time, it must be said that given the living conditions existing in the TSSR, this number should not be considered small. Party work among the Turkmen women is rather difficult, since the influence of everyday life is felt even in the work of the cells. In some places of the TSSR, trying to get out of this situation, they even try to create special female cells. The situation is more normal with work among girls, for whom separate Komsomol cells are being created; their conferences and meetings are convened separately from the men. Work with Komsomol members is directly supervised by women's departments. Women make up about one tenth of the total number of the Komsomol. Likewise, the pioneer movement penetrates the environment of children. Detachments of pioneer girls are usually found at dehkan's clubs and corners. The number of the female Turkmen proletariat is also growing; industrial development will play an important role in this matter. The spinning and weaving factory established in Ashgabat alone will provide jobs for several hundred women from the indigenous population. The absence of female farm laborers in the TSSR is explained by the prohibition on the part of the Turkmen custom of keeping women in the house, except for wives and concubines. A few years ago, it would have sounded improbable that a Turkmen woman could actively participate in the political life of the country and governing it, while now this has become possible, and every year it shows more and more female activity. In the last elections to the aul councils in 1927, 6% of women were elected, twice as many as in the previous year. On the initiative of the Central Election Commission, it was allowed to organize separate women's pre-election meetings and elections. The women showed great interest and attentive attitude to the case. Here, for example, how the women's meeting (pre-election) proceeded in the village of Ata, Tejen district. Out of 84 women attended the meeting, 21. The pre-village council made a report, and then asked: "Will there be questions? The questions were mixed with short speeches. smoky wagon at the women's meeting. One said: “So that there are no offended people when dividing land and water ... Leave on this site where we live now. Another one:“ The Soviet government has been paying no attention to women for several years. We are not given land. Why? -And she looked menacingly at the pre-village council. The resolution was passed without any outside guidance: - When distributing land and water, women do not forget to give them shares. The second report was heard on the participation of women in the election campaign. They spoke as the heart suggested. — You say that we go to meetings, study, and men look at us badly. — True, you say that the Soviet government did a lot for us, but only did not remake the men. — Do you understand the report ? —Got it. —Well, what resolution will we pass? —A question to the whole meeting. Aman Sultan — an activist — simply confessed: —By we understand that something needs to be said, but we cannot say how and what. A note as a member of the village council. The Koschi Union named two women. The women grew bolder, asked for the floor. “We must choose one, but one that will twist everyone, so that she is mobile and brisk. Last year the old woman was chosen, she was in prison, but there was no benefit from her. — Kisel Muradova. — It was hard — the old woman was rejected. Another woman was named. — Many children. — Aman Sultan Kara-bai Kyzy. Women raised two hands ... There were cases that at general election meetings, female candidates received the largest number of votes or the results of elections in which women were held as members of the village council , met with applause. Women were also elected to the presidium of the aulsovet, to district conventions and to the Congress of Soviets. Of course, in Ashgabat, in the central institutions of the TSSR, up to and including the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee, Turkmen women are now working. The attraction of broad layers of dekhkans to public life and the identification of the most active of them takes place through the institution of delegates and dekhkan women 's camps. However, the work with the introduction of the institution of female delegates is still only experimental, far from the cities, which is explained both by the weakness of party influence there and by the living conditions. In auls, the work of delegates is intermittent, they are not all involved in practical work, and their connection with voters is weak. Out of 749 female delegates of the TSSR, there are only 35 Turkmen women. At first, and this happens sometimes even now, the delegates were subjected to all sorts of bullying and persecution by the reactionary part of the men. kind of aul settlements and nomads. Here, depending on the type of economy, there are different conditions for women to work: the best in purely agricultural areas, where Party and Soviet work has been established, the situation is worse in areas with a mixed agricultural and cattle breeding type of economy, and in purely nomadic areas, work among women is very difficult Taking into account the living conditions, it was allowed to set up special women's clubs and dekhkanka corners where women could be without fear of meeting men. So far, there is only one establishment of an expanded club type for Turkmen women, this is Ts. D. D., Central House of Dekhkanka named after Clara Zetkin in Ashgabat. In view of the absence of the indigenous population in Ashgabat itself, the work of Ts.D. D. is designed for the dekhkans of neighboring auls, and he, replacing the clubs, is a link between dekhkans and the general Soviet culture. In addition, it is designed to serve the wives of a party member, Komsomol member, member of the Koshchi Union. Ts. D. D. has: an outpatient clinic — consultation, legal advice, bedrooms, classroom, work room, nursery, club hall, etc. Work Ts. D. D. among the Turkmen women is conducted in several directions, according to which the organization of the House was built. The cultural and educational department has a school for the elimination of illiteracy, to which they try to attract dekhkans, so that they can then be sent to obstetric or pedagogical courses. Also at Ts. D. D. there are one-year courses for the training of regional workers from the indigenous population among women. In Ts.D.D.D., reports and talks are given, especially political ones, on hygiene and sanitation. Periodically, visits are made to auls with doctors or a sister, where patients are received, medicines are distributed, conversations are arranged on medical topics. cinematographer Ts. House. Trips popularize Ts.D.D.D .; with some auls there is a constant connection. The task of the labor department is to disseminate cultural skills and methods in agriculture and domestic work among dehkans. Outpatient clinic — a consultation serviced by a woman of doctors, in addition to outpatient appointments, also conducts individual conversations on the protection of mothers and infants, hygiene, etc. In the Ts.DD, farmers are given legal advice and explanations. Having lived in Ts.D. D. for some time (up to 2 weeks) in a completely different than the aul environment, the dekhkan, having acquired a number of cultural skills and habits, becomes in her aul a bearer of a more cultured life, a popularizer of Ts. D. D. The influence of C. D. D. is expanding and brings good results; thus, at the request of the dehkan women who got acquainted with the Ts. DD, a number of schools were opened in the Ashgabat district. Ts. DD is the first experience in the USSR, which has already justified itself and in its work among women pursuing the goal not only to awaken them, but also to educate them. In addition to Ts. DD, in the TSSR, in the auls, there are about 2 dozen red corners for women of the indigenous population. However, not all of these corners have dedicated employees and work from time to time, from meeting to meeting. Some corners have a sewing machine, which serves as a bait for aul farmers. Existing in the railway dor. at points, women's clubs (New Chardzhui) are not purely Turkmen in nature, serving Russians as well; they also have educational programs, consultations, playgrounds, cooperative women's shops. In the spread of education among Turkmen women, the Party and the Soviet government have already done and are doing a huge amount of work. There are, however, certain difficulties: on the one hand, there is the opposition of reactionary elements, on the other, there is almost complete illiteracy among women. Before the October Revolution, a literate Turkmen woman was a very rare exception among her sisters and, as we have already indicated, back in 1924 there were only 25 literate Turkmen women in the whole of Turkmenistan, but now things are constantly improving. In order to directly influence children and spread cultural skills among the population, attention is paid to the organization of kindergartens in auls; 13 such gardens have already been opened; they are attended by several hundred Turkmen children, the percentage of girls in them is not yet high. Several hundred Turkmen girls study in schools, some in special closed schools (boarding schools); the school network is constantly growing. In order to attract more girls to schools, a number of privileges were provided to the Turkmens who send their daughters to study, and also, yielding to the way of life, separate schools were set up for them. The number of schools for the eradication of female illiteracy is also increasing. On the part of women, the craving for learning is very great, while some men - husbands, fathers, brothers - sometimes even send women to school, others are more reactionary, adhering to the Muslim view of women's education as an unacceptable and harmful thing , in every possible way prevent their loved ones from studying, and in such cases they sometimes have to attend schools secretly from men. Since one of the main obstacles in cultural and educational work in the TSSR is the lack of indigenous workers in the field of education, and Russians are not always able to approach the Turkmens, not knowing their language and living conditions, the issue of training a cadre of Turkmen women for this work among women attracted due attention. For the time being, pedagogical courses for indigenous women have been opened, and two institutes of public education and a pedagogical college are also serving this purpose. Higher education is also gradually beginning to penetrate the female environment; on the one hand, Turkmen women study in universities in Tashkent, on the other, in Moscow and Leningrad. Generally speaking, taking into account the living conditions and the state of women's education before the October Revolution, it must be considered that tremendous success has been achieved in this area. and infancy in the TSSR a lot of attention is paid, since it is very important for the Turkmen people. The poor hygienic living conditions of the Turkmen in general, and especially children, lead to enormous infant mortality; this is also facilitated by the lack of many of the most elementary cultural skills among the population, up to and including the use of soap. The Turkmen have many diseases of skin, eye (trachoma) and venereal diseases. There are many children with scab, scabies, eczema and eye diseases. Life in a wagon, which is a wooden lattice frame covered only with felt, blown through by cold air (frosts in the TSSR sometimes reach 30 °, and even in an open place) and unheated, leads to frequent lung diseases. In addition, the dirty environment of the wagon, life in semi-darkness and cramped conditions force us to raise the question of the soonest possible replacement of the wagon with a house for the settled population. The kibitka is already on the way to culture. Marriage of young people and minors and maiming of women in childbirth due to lack of obstetric care and basic scientific knowledge lead to a high incidence of female diseases among the indigenous female population. legislation protecting mother and child; and ideological influence on the male population in order to improve the status of women. Special commissions for the dissemination of sanitary and hygienic knowledge are working in the localities, a network of obstetric centers and consultations has been laid out, nurseries are being arranged for children, which play an important role for Turkmen mothers, teaching them how to handle children. Likewise, cooperation goes to meet mother and child, having among its goods also sanitary, hygiene and medicine items. However, the matter is hampered by the absence of leaders from among the indigenous population itself; Attention has already been paid to this issue, and in order to quickly create Turkmen midwifery personnel in Ashgabat, an obstetric technical school for 60 people was opened, replenished exclusively from the indigenous population. and the marriage of minors, and the declaration of the kalym as illegal enrichment, which can now be demanded back, it cannot yet be said that this will come true. Soviet legislation is far from being implemented everywhere, and often, if it is, it is in a distorted form. The influence of adat is still too strong. In the city of Kaakhka, the court tried a case on the charge of a Turkmen who forced his 14-year-old son to marry an 18-year-old. Notdels distinguish in courts in cases affecting the interests of women, special advocates and public prosecutors, and attract women to the judges. These measures — the participation of women in the work of the courts — are absolutely necessary in the TSSR, although it should be noted that, in general, this participation is still insufficient, and there are still few Narza-sedators; however, as the female asset grows, the situation improves. In addition, special consultations are organized on women's affairs (as, for example, under Ts.D.D.). At the same time, one cannot talk about the emancipation of a woman while she is economically dependent on her husband, father, brother, guardian, etc. It is necessary to give her the opportunity to become economically independent. In the TSSR, this task is facilitated by the fact that almost every Turkmen woman, in addition to her household work, contributes to the family budget at least g / 5 - D of the total family income through her handicraft labor (mainly carpet weaving, which is not done only 2-3 % of all Turkmen women). It was necessary to unite, organize, support the carpet weavers, find a sale for their works, and provide orders. This all makes women more independent in their family and strengthens their relationship with the public. After the World War and the Civil War, carpet making fell dramatically compared to the pre-war period; the task of the day was to raise this branch of handicraft labor by cooperating producers. This work began as early as 1922/23, but until 25 years old it did not bring great results, when the women's department of the Central Committee of the Communist Party (Bolsheviks) paid serious attention to this issue, and the cooperation of handicraft carpet weavers was put on a broader scale, and other institutions were involved in this matter. (Gostorg, VSNKh, Banks). Having started with 7 artels with 150 dekhkans at the beginning of 1926, the number of artels is constantly growing and has increased tenfold over the last year. On the part of farmers, the artels cause the best attitude; thousands of applications are being made for the formation of new artels and the provision of loans. In order to raise the qualifications of carpet weavers and preserve the valuable old drawings that have begun to disappear, courses for carpet weaving were opened in Merv in 1926. Cooperation of handicraftsmen of other specialties (for example, silk weavers) is next in line, but does not matter much. cooperative shops set up in Central Asia, including the TSSR; such a shop operates in Old Chardzhui. There the Turkmen woman is not afraid to meet men}, and a special selection of goods satisfies the taste and needs of the customers. The number of female shareholders is constantly growing. The organization of independent female households is also one of the means of economic liberation for women. In 1925-26, a land reform was carried out in the TSSR, but at the same time the land taken from the landowners and kulaks was distributed not according to the air, but among the farms; therefore, of the women, only those who managed their own household and widows were given land. In total, over 1,200 women's farms have been established. However, the assistance to these farms is still insufficient; some of them have few living and dead inventory. The creation of women's farms is a clear and vivid agitation for women's equality. Soviet culture, having burst into Turkmen life, regulated by adat, is continuously expanding and deepening its influence. Under the guidance of more experienced and cultured workers, the emancipation of the Turkmen woman is being accomplished. The area of ​​family relations, where a woman had no rights according to adat, is one of the most striking examples of the successes achieved. It is not yet everywhere, but in some places the woman felt equal in the family. Although the proverb says that “the cow does not choose water, but the woman of her husband”, now the farmer is beginning to refuse to marry the man she was married to in the cradle. Under the protection of Soviet laws, the Turkmen woman herself began to seek a divorce from her husband, although this does not happen so often. So, in 1925, 422 applications for divorce were filed in total. Most of the requirements for divorce are caused by beatings, opium smoking by husbands, polygamy and a very large difference in years (the wife is 20 years old, and the husband is 60 or 90). A divorce at the request of the wife, regardless of the reason that caused it, is the moral murder of the husband, therefore divorces are made only if they are justified, and besides, it should be borne in mind that according to Turkmen laws, all divorces, in order to protect the rights of women, go through the courts The work of Soviet power brings cultural light into the depths of the TSSR, but, of course, this violates the interests of all those who are not profitable for the changes, and from this side it encounters strong opposition. opposition both from all the reactionary elements of the country (clergy, kulaks-bai), and from part of the male population of the country, if their interests are affected by the new order, although among the advanced part of men there has been a sharp change in views on the emancipation of women. Unfortunately, even some of the Turkmen party members could not immediately abandon the old views and institutions, and the central party The authorities had to draw their attention to the complete inadmissibility for the party members of polygamy, kalym, the marriage of minors, etc. On the other hand, not all persons who are part of the Soviet administrative and judicial apparatus have learned or wished to learn the basics of the new legal situation women, thanks to which they allow the distortion of Soviet legislation. There were even such isolated facts as the case that occurred in Ashgabat, when, in front of a guard policeman, a Turkmen husband killed his wife, a cadet at an obstetric college; to a cry for help from her friends, with whom the murdered woman was walking down the street, the policeman replied: “this is a private matter of the husband and wife, no one should interfere.” The judiciary is sometimes inattentive to protecting women's interests, dragging out such cases, and it feels like that the indigenous workers of the investigation and inquiry do not look at the position of women from the point of view of Soviet legality. However, despite all the dangers, despite the fact that it is still far from complete emancipation, and new ideas, the further inland the country, the more opposition they find, Most of the women are still far from realizing the gravity of their situation, there are more and more brave Turkmen women who do not stop before threats, persecution, beatings, attempts on their lives, etc. and break the connection with their old life. for his courage, for work in the women's department or as a delegate, disobedience to her husband, desire to study, and the like. Among the dead are Anne Kulieva, the founder of the Center. House of Dekhkanka and Anna Dzhemal, an active worker in the liberation of a woman from Turkmenistan. Many women had and now have to endure a lot for the desire to use the rights proclaimed by the Soviet government. However, every year the cause of the liberation of the Turkmen toiler is moving forward, and the results obtained in this backward country can be called quite satisfactory. With the spread of enlightenment and the growth of party influence in the TSSR, the cause of the complete emancipation of the Turkmen woman will more and more move towards its full realization.