1. Uzbekistan after the national-state demarcation of Central Asia, General outline of the country.
In 1925, an event of significant historical importance took place in the life of the USSR. The colossal expanse of Central Asian thousand-verst steppes and deserts, revitalized by rare green islands of ancient cities and villages, this whole huge, multi-tribal, half of Western Europe, country, which conquered Soviet power already in 1917, after 8 years was divided into several national states in which the vital energy of the peoples of Central Asia will henceforth be concentrated. As a result of this, carried out mainly by the efforts of our party, the great transformation, two new independent republics were created - the Uzbek and the Turkmen, two autonomous republics: the Kyrgyz and Tajik and one autonomous region - the Kara-Kalpak ... Tajiks and two autonomous regions - Kyrgyz and Kara-Kalpak. Born under such circumstances in 1925, Uzbekistan, bordering from the north with the Republic of Kazakov and the Kara-Kalpak autonomous region, in the east with mountainous Kyrgyzstan and even more mountainous Tajikistan, in the south with Afghanistan and in the west with Turkmenistan, lies 3 thousand kilometers from Moscow. It lies beyond the sandy seas and deserts, but one of the most important and full-blooded steel veins of our state body, starting at the heart of the Union, completely destroys this remoteness. The steel path going through Samara to Orenburg, passing the grassy steppe of the Orenburg province, enters the burned the sun of Kazakhstan and, bypassing the slopes of the beautiful Mugodzhar mountains, invades the sandy seas, only very weakly revitalized by the wide and long river Syr Darya. Cutting straight through them for a thousand miles and bypassing the shores of the Aral Sea and swampy lakes, our train approaches the city of Turkestan, in which the desert of the steppes alternates with the often found small areas of irrigated fields and poplar groves. Here, at the Arys River, branches off to the east along this river the Semirechenskaya railway, which is being built for 600 kilometers x). This is also a link in the construction of the Siberian railway by Turkestan. From this link, a branch will grow, which, according to the project, will reach the huge Issyk-Kul Lake, lying at the Chinese border. In 12 hours we come to the Kazy-Kurt Mountains, behind which Uzbekistan lies. The train goes up the mountains. It takes about two hours to get to Tashkent, the main center of education and economic life of Uzbekistan; the capital, Samarkand, is still 400 miles away. The route from Tashkent to Samarkand follows the middle of the three, once politically divided countries that make up the Uzbek Republic. To the left of the railway track, a few dozen versts, mountains rise, behind which lies the entire Fergana surrounded and hidden by them, and to the west and south of the capital 'Samarkand district will go the lands of the third Uzbek country, Bukhara. First, let's look at Fergana. High mountain ranges, encircling from four sides, they close this country from the rest of the world, making it a natural fortress of gigantic proportions, an area of ​​120 thousand square miles, 400 miles from north to south, more than 300 miles from west to east. Its southern wall is the highest, the Alai mountain range covered with eternal ice and snow, behind which lies the mountainous country of Pamir, divided between Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan - “The Roof of the World”. The eastern wall, the Fergana mountain range, approaches Alai at the corner abutting against China. Through the northern double mountain wall to go to Kazakhstan, and only the western wall forms a gate through which flows out of Fergana, which is born in it, a wide one and a half thousand miles running along the sands to the Aral Sea, the Syr-Darya river, along the bank of which through the same the gate creeps into Fergana by a railway. Anyone who has the opportunity to get better acquainted with Central Asian nature, so unlike our Russian one, it is better to go to Fergana not on this train. and along the old caravan route Aulie-ata-Namangan, which runs along the valley of the Talas River. Near the town of Aulie-ata, he will see on his way a wonderful picture of the breakthrough of a raging river through the rather high Cha-Archinsky mountains. Talas here runs in one channel across the entire width of the gorge, between black, bare shale rocks that rise steeply a thousand feet above the river, barely leaving room for the path we pass to Fergana. Rare small islands with dense, bright greenery amidst the raging mass of Talas waters, in the gloomy setting of the highest cliffs, glisten in the sun like emeralds in a silver frame. We leave the gorge. No sooner had the gloomy abyss of the mountains moved away than a completely different picture unfolded before our eyes. The entire right bank of Talas and the valley lying behind it, right up to the foothills receding into the distance, are covered with motley pieces of irrigated fields, often cut by water veins-ditches, which are still being drained from Talas. Several tens of miles our way goes through these fields. But now, on the almost forever blue sky, the horizon rises and grows a bluing mountain range with bright white snows. Behind them lies it Fergana. Coming out of the gorge, the path goes along a high mountain range, along the banks of the Chatkal River descending into the Fergana Valley. The descent of this river is four times steeper than the famous Finnish Imatra waterfall. In the majestic setting of mountains topped with snow, near which clouds constantly converge and then scatter, clinging to the cliffs, under a bright blue sky, the Chatkal valley, which we pass, flaunts with its fresh greenery, light with silver foam, a fast river flowing through poplar groves. Here, we are already in Fergana, not far from the tract "Thousands of keys" (Ming-bulak), where twelve centuries ago there was a summer pasture of the Turkish khans, when, coming out of the Chinese borders close from here, the Turkish people slowly moved to the West. Now here live, who came in ancient times from the Siberian forests and mountains of the Kyrgyz, formerly called wild-stone Kyrgyz. In general, at the foot of the wild, majestic mountains that surround Fergana from the north, east and south, near the black forests descending from the heights, here and there the scattered felt yurts (tents) of the Kyrgyz are whitewashed, which is why these places belong to the neighboring Kyrgyz Republic, and the Fergana valley located below the foothills, with an area of ​​20 thousand square miles, inhabited by Uzbeks and is part of the Uzbek Republic. We stayed with you in the foothills, towering over this wide valley of Fergana, which now lies at our feet. ' Here it is, visible in the distance about thirty too far. On the gray-yellow canvas of sandy and saline steppes, now almost devoid of vegetation, here and there light and dark green spots can be seen. These spots are (tiled lands, the result of the hard work of the Uzbek peasant. They huddle over a thin and dense network of water veins that make up large and small irrigation systems, without which no life is possible in the local desert, sun-burned sandy steppes. Such, surrounded by deserts lying, living places are called oases. In general, each of the large oases, enclosing a city or a large village (in Uzbek, "kishlak", that is, "wintering", since earlier, roaming the steppes, spring, summer and autumn, in the village the Uzbek only hibernated), looks like this in Uzbekistan: there are comparatively large areas along the outer edge of the oasis (x) separate areas of unenclosed fields sown with wheat, barley, rice (sown in the mud formed by grooves - "irrigation ditches"), alfalfa (forage: grass), cotton, madder (a plant from which a strong red dye is extracted). As you get closer to the center of the oasis, individual plots of land become smaller, but with better plowing and irrigation. Fields begin to come across, fenced with low, one and a half arshins high, clay fences, from behind which a mulberry tree, poplar and other trees rise, and vegetables (melons, watermelons, carrots and onions), tobacco and occasionally vineyards join the crops ... Farther to the center, there are almost no unenclosed fields; each individual plot is lined with a large number of trees in one or two rows. There is a mulberry tree and a tall poplar, a spreading elm and a walnut, and other local trees. Bread plants are almost completely replaced by melons, vineyards, alfalfa; on the road more and more often there are carts - carts on two huge, taller than human, wheels, people riding on donkeys, foot and horse; on the sides at every step you can see gardens with vineyards, pomegranates, apple trees, pears, various varieties of plums, tall and slender poplars, elm, nuts and mulberries. Finally, the city itself begins. On both sides of the narrow streets, which sometimes do not allow two carts to move apart, there are yellow-gray, adobe walls of one-story, for the most part, houses with flat earthen roofs, without a single window to the street; the same adobe fences; low and small gates Near them, in the street dust, small groups of half-naked, grimy, but pretty children of both sexes are playing. Among the colorful and noisy crowds of the narrow street, there are very few Uzbek women, compared to men. The reason for this peculiar phenomenon we will learn when we get to know the population As far as the general features of the layout of its small and large oases, which are its cities and villages, are the same in Uzbekistan, the nature surrounding human habitation is so diverse, a piece that we have already seen when following the caravan route from Kazakhstan to Fergana. passages, mountain ranges are replaced at their feet by cheerfully 'colorful squares of fields, and beyond them now begin, seemingly endless, lifeless deserts scorched by the merciless sun, dangerous for travelers. In them, huge, several fathoms high, sand waves give way to white saline plains, and behind them, one after another, as far as the eye can see, hiding sand waves, a general phenomenon that reigns throughout Uzbekistan, remains an extraordinary poverty of water. Above the fertile soil of the country, aridity gravitates and man hardly tears its chains, shackling the rich productivity of the land. The eastern part of the country, Fergana, which we have placed, is in relatively happy conditions, since the mountain ring in which it is enclosed feeds the land with streams and rivers. But here the land plots are smaller. Adjacent to the giant walls Fergana from south-west the capital Samarkand district, is irrigated by nature only in narrow strips along the slopes of the high Turkestan mountain range, and along the banks of the river, which is born in the eternal snows. Zeravshan, near Samarkand itself, branched into small rivulets, from which a dense network of canals-ditches is diverted. Outside this aquifer, a wild desert dominates, turning in the north, within the Kazan limits, into the Hungry Steppe, terrible for travelers, called by the local peoples "Bedpak-Dala," that is, the unfortunate steppe. The Zeravshan River, whose name in Russian means "gold-bearing", carrying moisture and extremely precious silt for crops for 700 miles across the dry lands, is really gold-bearing for the mountain valley of Tajikistan and for the Uzbek districts - Samarkand, Zeravshan and Bukhara , where most of the Uzbek people live. Along the same main life artery of the country are located: the capital of the republic, the ancient city of Samarkand that existed several centuries before our era, populous Bukhara, once the capital of a special state and the ancient cities of the country Katta-Kurgan (ie "Great Fortress"), Penjkent (meaning "Five cities") and others. The second center of the country is Tashkent, which lies outside the basin of the "Gold-bearing river", in the basin of another great river Sr. Asia-Syr-Darya, also in antiquity is not inferior to our Kiev. By the way, oddly enough, a number of peoples who lived almost 1000 years ago near Kiev and in general in southern Russia now live within Uzbekistan. Such peoples include the Polovtsy or Kipchaks, who inhabited most of the present-day Ukraine, as well as the Volzhsk-Don steppes. Some of them moved to Hungary, some to Georgia and Bulgaria, and the rest were greatly weakened by the Mongol invasion, and then squeezed out by the Russian conquests. Now the Kipchaks make up a noticeable part of the Uzbek people. Let us also note the Kara-Kalpaks known in Kievan Rus under the name of "black hoods" who migrated to Asia and now live in the Khorezm district of Uzbekistan (formerly Khiva), and the main arr. in its national autonomous region. Finally, part of the Khazar tribe lives in Uzbekistan, the alleged descendants of the great Khazar people who once inhabited southern and partly central Russia, part of which, breaking away from the main mass, went to the North. Persia.

2. Population, its ethnic and social composition and economy let us now dwell on the main people of the country of interest to us. The four million Uzbek people, together with their neighbors - Kyrgyz, Kyrgyz-Cossacks, Turkmens, Kara-Kalpaks, whose republics are part of the USSR, with foreign neighbors, Dungans and Uighurs, inhabiting Western China, as well as together with Tatars, Chuvashes, Meshcheryaks, Bashkirs Yakuts, Altai, Khakass, Azerbaijanis, Turks, P'olus-Slavic Bulgarians and Balkars, belongs to the forty-five million family of Turkish-Tatar or Turkic peoples, of which about thirty million are part of our Union, being in it the second largest national group after the Slavic, to which owns Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians. The total number of the Uzbek people does not reach up to four million, of which 3.200.000 live within their republic, about half a million outside the USSR, Afghanistan, and about 200 thousand in neighboring Turkmenistan and Tajikistan. Uzbekistan is a country , exclusively agriculture, and, as an economic unit, is primarily a raw material base oh in the economy of our entire Union. The existing insignificant factory industry served earlier, again, the industrial industry of Russia in the form of the initial processing of products intended for it; only now, gradually enlarging and developing the local industry, the Soviet construction of the republic has in mind the creation of its own industry in the future.In the restoration process that began in 1923, the main attention was naturally directed to the cotton ginning and oil-processing industry, without which the expansion of cotton growing would be impossible the products of which are intended for export require preliminary local industrial processing. In parallel with this, at the same time they began to restore the old 'and create new industries. By the tenth anniversary of October, the industry of Uzbekistan, in terms of the value of its gross output, had leveled 100 percent with the pre-war level, and immediately after that began to outgrow the old norm. From the extractive industry, the main attention is paid to the fuel industry, which, due to the natural wealth of the Fergana region's subsoil (oil is developed in the dyasti fields, coal in the rich Kyzyl-Kiy mines), provides a solid base for industrialization. Striving for the transition to the cheapest and perfect form of energy, in view of the presence of natural data, the basis for the start of extensive work on the electrification of Uzbekistan. Uzbekistan is predominantly an agricultural republic. In it the predominant part of the cotton plantations of Central Asia is concentrated. It also contains the bulk of the area under grain and cereals, as well as gardens and vineyards. At the same time, the area of ​​cotton plantations in the Tashkent and Fergana regions of the republic exceeds the area of ​​cereal by 41/2 and 3fg times. The following comparative table shows in percentage the proportion of crops in the pre-war period and in ours (see table, next page). shows that in our time the area of ​​cotton plantations in relation to the entire sown area of ​​the republic has expanded, in some places, even twice as compared to the pre-war period, although the amount of land under cotton is now slightly (10-12 percent) and less than the pre-war period. This is mainly explained by the reduction in the total sown area of ​​the country, due to the incomplete completion of work to restore the country's complex irrigation system, which was significantly destroyed and fell into complete decline during the civil war (from 1920 or rather 1917 and the beginning of 1923). Rebuilt in 1926, the powerful Bozsuy hydroelectric power station quickly moved forward the restoration of the crop area, which contributed to the expansion of the plantation by 1/3, during the same year. Land reclamation associations concerned with improving the quality of care and processing increased from 51 to 124. About 600 tractors were already operating in the fields of the country. The indigenous inventory (catmen, i.e., a hoe, a pick, a wooden plow, a chamois instead of a scythe, etc.) was replaced by the European one by 11%, which was greatly facilitated by the rapid growth of the agronomic network since the national demarcation of Wed. Asia in 1925. Another, which took place in the same 1925, the most important event in the life of the country - the land reform was carried out in this way. The remnants of serfdom that did not survive before the reform led to (the fact that the Baysko-kulak elements of the city and kishlak gathered up to The bondage of all cultivated land, with the simultaneous lack of land and landlessness of the main mass of the peasant population. The main reason for the establishment of ugly land relations in Uzbekistan was the penetration of Russian capital there and its influence on the development of the cotton economy. The system of broad credit, the rapid growth of the layer of intermediaries that became numerous, the exploitation of dehkan consumers through grain operations, land shortages with a significant population density in cotton-growing regions - all this caused the appearance of a local capitalist-merchant, a bai, who took over significant land plots and turned land rent into commercial and usurious capital. and middle man some part of the dekhkanship followed the path of taking over land and living and dead implements. The stratification of dekhkans was significant. The overwhelming mass of poor peasants, agricultural laborers, landless peasants who worked with Bai tools, received only a third, or even a quarter of the harvest, was formed. How the Eemreform affected the country's peasant plots is shown by the following tablet (see table, next page). Of course, there are still many poor peasants today. One-tenth of all farms in the country belong to non-sown (in the central regions. The share of low-sown (with an allotment of no more than one tithe) accounts for a third of all farms in the country, while in Fergana 43% are low-sown. , represent half of the entire peasantry. Large dekhkan farms, with sowing more than 4 dess.-7%. Zeravshan region is in a more favorable position, it has pastures, so the peasantry there managed to save livestock. In Fergana and Tashkent the ruin of the overwhelming mass of the peasantry occurred much faster. That is why the peasantry of Uzbekistan is so poor in working cattle. A third of all farms do not have it at all; a third has one head each, a quarter has two heads, and only a tenth of 3-4 and more heads.In Fergana, about half of the peasantry; (46%) do not have draft animals at all.; Taking care of eliminating such poverty with animals needed in the economy, the government of the republic, in addition to providing funds and supplies I am on preferential terms, dehkan, I mean the wide distribution of the correct formulation of cattle breeding. For this purpose, a splendidly equipped Zootechnical Institute was opened in 27 AD. Due to the wide spread of silkworm breeding in the country, significant numbers of dehkans, especially women, are engaged in crafts related to it - silk-weaving and silk-weaving. About 25 thousand handicraftsmen are united by trade cooperation, as well as about 12% of other handicraftsmen, making up about one and a half thousand people. The importance of the handicraft industry in Uzbekistan is explained by the fact that its products still slightly exceed the products of the local state industry. Its cooperation is going well; suffice it to say that in one financial year 1925-26, the industrial cooperation of Uzbekistan increased in number by 50%.
3. The woman of Uzbekistan before the revolution
One by one, PO 'two, with guys in their arms, with knots of silk cocoons on their heads, with faces covered with a thick net of horsehair, in gray veils, that is, robes, thrown over the head with sleeves long to the ground, move with a smooth, slightly hasty gait, strange, very rare figures in a crowded crowd, along an exhaustingly hot street. We rarely come across them because, according to the Uzbek custom, it is indecent for a woman to appear at the bazaar; she is there only when there is no one to replace her. The same custom deprives an Uzbek woman of the right to sell the result of her labors herself, even if they are many years old, such as carpets, but she, in such heat characteristic of Turkestan, wrapped from head to toe with different wings and robes, comes with her own - Finally, you can take off all the ridiculous bells and whistles and breathe freely, and not through the net! In what environment does an Uzbek woman live at home? Let us first consider her dwelling. It differs in many ways from ours. The whole environment in which a Muslim lives, the whole world; in which he revolves all his life, created according to the dictates of his religion. And the subordination of all important and minor aspects of life and their construction according to their numerous prescriptions is the fundamental rule of the religion of Muslims - Islam. Not so much the founder of Islam, Muhammad, the dreamy and gifted prasol, who became a religious and political figure in Arabia, as (numerous later teachers of Islam who on the basis of the urban culture created by the commercial capital, they tried to arrange the whole life of a Muslim according to their superstitions based either on the dark places of the holy book of Muslims - the Koran, then on ancient legends, or on their own inventions. For example, 'Mohammed in the Koran orders his assistants: also to believing women, so that they lower their gaze; keep themselves from passionate desires, show only those of their outfits that are out; put covers on their breasts ... "As you can see, with the last words the founder of the religion puts a veil on his chest Muslim women. About any other veils, neither here, nor in other places x Quran is not a word. So it would seem that there was no need to introduce them; and, in fact, among the Volga-Ural Tatars, who converted to Islam from their Bulgar ancestors a thousand years ago (in 1922 there was a thousandth anniversary), the general traditional domestic constraint of a woman is not complicated by hiding herself behind nets and bedspreads. But, unfortunately, since then the significance of the peculiar urban culture of Persia, with its jealous hiding of women, has grown in the Muslim world. Some respectable teachers, wishing to distinguish themselves in general by the respectable severity of the rules they uttered, among other things, put a net on the face of an unrequited woman, and on all her already multilayered clothes, a gray burqa, an absurd robe, thrown overhead, with p 'by the decrees. Of course, they, as well as their numerous followers, refer to the Koran, but, as we see, it is not at all thorough: in it, Mohammed praises women dressed only in "veiled", that is, without exposing bare arms, legs, neck and hair. Although the most developed part of the Uzbek clergy (mullahs), and now realizes the groundlessness of wrapping up in a net and a veil, however, very often defends this tradition, not wanting to succumb to the efforts of the atheist Bolsheviks. Only a very, very few of them do not object to the removal of nets and veils, or agree with this, seeing the power of the women's liberation movement. Similarly, the introduction of a woman's seclusion into the custom is based only on tradition. Once, the legend says, when Mohammed moved from one city to another, in the evening, when the caravan stopped in the wild desert, one of the four wives of the "prophet", his most beloved Aisha, departed from the caravan as needed and at the same time lost her necklace. she looked for him in the dark, but the caravan had taken off and had gone very far. The servants carrying a palanquin (portable canopy) in their arms did not notice that it was empty, as Aisha was remarkably light. What can you do? Aisha sat down on the desert sand, and she cried with fear all night. Fortunately for her, in the morning another caravan, heading in the same direction as Mogometov, came across Aisha and brought her home. And on this occasion, the prophet, as if he ordered once and for all the wives of the faithful to leave the house after sunset, and, as it were, ordered the husbands to restrain their wives at home. As for the Quran itself, it is limited only to praise addressed to the homebody. The barbaric, now obsolete custom of marrying girls from the age of nine, the custom so severely crippling these children physically and morally, is again based only on the legend according to which the beloved wife of Mohammed, the same Aisha, taken as a wife by the prophet, namely, at the age of nine. So, religion, or rather, a time-honored tradition, forbids an Uzbek woman to appear in front of strangers without a veil and advises that the latter, if possible, do not hear and even her voices. Such a resolution of the religious code, of course, could not but affect the general nature and location of the dwellings. In most cases, wherever this is in the slightest degree possible with the available funds of a given family, the yard is divided into two completely separate half-barns: outer, male and domestic, female, family - “ichkari.” We do not find such double-structured courtyards only among the poorest families, who do not have funds for the construction of buildings in almost double the number, or among those whose estates are so small that by their own dimensions do not allow them to be divided into two parts.In this case, satisfying the requirements of religion, the Uzbek arranged his buildings so that with the open gate leading to the street, a woman leaving the house to the outer courtyard would not be visible to people passing along the street, for which, very often, a wall higher than a person's height is displayed in front of the gate or gate, blocking most of the outer courtyard from prying eyes. From the one who entered the outer courtyard, the ichkari, that is, the women's courtyard, is completely hidden by a high fence. The female half is often also called "haram" (harem), that is, something forbidden, since one man's qi, excluding the closest wife's relatives, has the right to look into this corner hidden behind several walls, in which most of the life of an Uzbek woman passes. Moreover, the young wife, according to custom, does not leave it anywhere (with the exception of tidying up the outer courtyard) until the birth of her first child. With such an extraordinary secrecy of family life, there is, however, a curious exception when every stranger has the right to intervene in this life. It often happens that after the insult or beatings inflicted by her husband, the wife resorts to a somewhat salvific cry “wai-do-od!” - (guard!). Everyone who has heard this cry, according to Muslim custom, not only can, but must enter the courtyard and do everything possible to reconcile the spouses, which is considered a soul-saving business. Usually ”, husband; in order to prevent undesirable interference for him, he locked the exit to the courtyard and then already resorted to a whip or a whip. As often as such cases of attitude towards his wife were, there were still many exceptions, since everything essentially depended primarily on character husband, a man, of course, always dark, imbued with the view of a woman as a significant inferior creature in comparison with a man. A much more serious phenomenon for the Uzbek woman was her economic enslavement, consecrated by centuries-old custom, and complete propertylessness during divorce and inheritance. Although a peasant woman in Uzbekistan ("dekhkanka") works no less than men, doing all the household, gardening, part of the field work, and alone doing all the work on fabric, etc., selling the very products of her labor, as we have already indicated, considered indecent for her. The husband sells them and takes the money earned by the farmer. Also in the cities: carpets, skullcaps, and various sewing made by his wife were sold exclusively by the husband and the money went to him. makes her economically disenfranchised, but also takes a heavy toll on her health. In addition, having got married for 10-12 years, being still a child herself, she must manage the household, raise children, it is clear that health and strength will soon wear out, the dekhkan woman quickly begins to age. Often, at the age of 25, she looks almost old. In addition to early (especially in villages) marriage, the health of a farmer is also affected by the harmful conditions inherent in the life of an Uzbek woman. She has to spend most of her life, with the exception of summer time, in the female half, deprived of air and sun. The veil, covering her face, contributes to the weakening of vision and eye diseases, and the veil does not provide an opportunity to receive fresh air and sun. Her body does not know soap. Speaking of the unusually early, at 10-12 years old, marriage of a farmer, it should be noted that an Uzbek woman, a town dweller, three or four years ago, a little later; at the age of 13-14 she was married by her parents). Hence, there are so many patients with female diseases in Uzbekistan. Deaths during childbirth are not uncommon, due to the complete lack of basic knowledge in the field of obstetrics and gross violation of the most important hygiene rules. There were no midwives at all and women gave birth often being suspended according to an old custom on ropes or over a pit with ashes. It is interesting to note that many of these hardships were experienced in due time by a Russian woman. There was a time, three hundred years ago, when a Russian woman also lived in seclusion. She, just like an Uzbek woman now, was completely economically dependent on her husband, she was completely illiterate, completely dark, lived in the female half. Her parents: when they wanted, then they gave her in marriage, without asking the girl for whom she wants to go. Issuing No matter how deeply negative in all respects the living conditions of the Uzbek woman are in all respects, it must be admitted that it was they who, in the form of a reaction, developed in the character of the Uzbek woman a high degree of sociability with other, even if only before, unfamiliar women your city or village. Thanks to this sociability, women who are completely unfamiliar, seeing each other for the first time, in the shortest time, in some 11 / 2-2 hours, feel themselves familiar for a long time. With the manifestation, as is usually always the case of mutual sympathy, one such meeting is quite enough for them to call each other "ortak" - friend-comrade, or "apa" - sister. For an Uzbek woman, communication with other women used to be the only opening in life, the only entertainment. Of course, the constant desire for sociability shown by the Uzbek woman is a feature far from being unimportant on the path of her successful construction of a new life. Uzbekistan remembers in the history of the last 'century, isolated curious cases when three of the most powerful-spirited women, having managed to break the chains of centuries-old custom, advanced quite high in public life ... These cases are as follows: About 70 years ago, a woman died here, a certain Khal-Bibi, popularly known as Khal-mirab-bashi. Even before the Russian conquest, which followed in 1876, Hal-Bibi's husband was in the Namangan region (province ) the boss over the "mirabs", that is, head of the water section for irrigated areas. The position of the "mirab-bashi" of the provincial chief over the mirab is very important and responsible, since the well-being of the whole province and its individual cities and villages depends on the orders of the mirab-bashi, therefore, this position requires exceptional energy (resourcefulness and discretion. Even during her husband's life, she was well acquainted with the details of the local irrigation (irrigation) system, energetic, lively Hal-Bibi always took the most direct part in her husband's affairs.After the death of her husband, when she was already in her forties, she threw off her veil and chadra, dressed in a man's dress and forcing the Namangap people to recognize her as their mirab-bashi, took the place of her husband and sent all his duties until his death x). Her son, for whom she herself paved the way to the khan's palace, was later governor. The second case of the nomination of a woman, although less interesting, nevertheless deserves mention for its rarity in Uzbekistan. He was about a hundred years ago during the reign of Omar, Khan of Kokand. In the capital of the khanate, Ko-Kanda, now the uyezd city of the Fergana region, lived two poetesses, Uzbeks, who wrote: one under the pseudonym Zinnat, which means "Ukrasa (life)", and the other under the pseudonym of Makhzun, i.e. "Sad, sad." Both of them often visited the khan's palace, in the company of Uzbek poets, and one of them came to the court in a man's dress, with an open face and had the title of general. The works of both poetesses were included in the well-known collection of poems written by Omar Khan himself and his court poets, but this rare case of the promotion of an Uzbek woman in society is, of course, less interesting than the previous one, since it owes less than the first to the personal qualities of the advanced woman. After all, both Uzbek poetesses grew up and were brought up in relatively happy conditions for the female share of the life of the big urban bourgeoisie and the nobility, where only one could still find a woman who was generally well literate. The general state of literacy among women was absolutely deplorable. One more or less literate Uzbek woman accounted for many thousands of illiterate. The education of the Uzbeks (as well as the education of other peoples of Russia) interested the tsarist government as a means of an annoying policy, the ultimate goal of which was the complete conversion of "foreigners" into Russians, and one of the stages was the gradual displacement the native language of the Russian until it was completely forgotten. Of course, the school was one of the most effective tools for this. And the government officially charged the local educators with the task of Russifying the natives' students. It approached the implementation of this rather complex task in several stages. The government, having established its authority on the territory of present-day Uzbekistan in the sixties of the last century, understood that in the near future the Uzbek population, firm and fanatical in its faith, was still hotly experiencing the events of the struggle for independence, simply, will not let its children into Russian schools. Therefore, it was decided to start the business of school Russification in Turkestan with the neighbors of the Uzbeks, the Kyrgyz-Cossacks, as a people with much weaker cultural and religious foundations and, moreover, the Uzbeks previously subordinate to Russia. The organization of Russian schools for Kyrgyz children began with the establishment of in 1879 the Tashkent teachers' seminary, V. which the children of the Kyrgyz-Cossacks living in Uzbekistan were to study together with the Russians. This is how the first stage of Russification through the school was laid, which, however, did not bring great results. The second stage was an introduction to the course. After that, along with the increased admission of Kyrgyz-Cossacks to the seminary, Uzbeks from the ranks of the local prosperous merchants began to enter the seminary, taking into account the fact that the class of the Uzbek bourgeoisie entered the wide trading, banking and commodity-exchange operations, was aware of the need to give his children a good knowledge of Russian literacy and language, the local authorities in 1884 in the same Tashkent opened the "First Russian-native school for natives children." Two years after the opening of this school, when the successful enrollment of bourgeois sons into it was revealed., when, moreover, the upper circles of the Uzbek bourgeoisie began to draw closer to the Russian administration of the region, the Turkestan governor Rosen-bakh, encouraging local teachers to russify activities, officially expressed confidence that (the Russian language through Russian-native schools, "must become the native language of the native population of Turkestan." In addition, the governor expressed the hope that the desire for cultural independence, which was revealed in some Muslim schools, would be devoid of soil, since the Russian-native schools would lead to the merging of the old Muslim schools with them. Together with a call to action in this direction, our worthy fighter for the depersonalization of Russian subjects established, in his own words, "real and constant control over the direction of Muslim schools." Intervention in the life of Muslim schools was carried out under the plausible pretext of instructing them, communicating the necessary useful instructions and helping them in their needs. For this purpose, an inspectorate of Muslim schools in Turkestan was established, but after a few years, however, it was closed at the insistence of more far-sighted local teachers. In general, very few of the governor-general's "educational" dreams have come true. Only the Tashkent Russian-native school lived a more or less full life, teaching the children of the large Uzbek merchants, which are quite numerous here; nevertheless, other schools founded in the most important cities of Uzbekistan and even in the largest kishlaks barely eked out existence, due to the low attendance of their children by the local population.In order to induce the Uzbeks to send their boys to Russian - native schools, the Turkestan governor general ordered the military the governors of the region to take all possible measures to ensure that only those natives who knew Russian well were appointed to various administrative positions and services. The persistent Uzbek uprisings, broken by bayonets and guns, which followed between 1892 and 98 For some time, they put a limit on the annoying experiments. Later, the administrative regime, as well as official supervision of Muslim schools, resumed, and already in 1904 the situation did not differ significantly from the previous one. 1905 caused a strong shift in a number of Turkic peoples of Russia, in particular among the Kazan and Crimean Tatars. Ideas of a nationalist character prevailed, but in some places there was already talk of class struggle. So, in one tsz of the first issues of the organ of the Tatar progressive intelligentsia "Muslim", it is said that "we need to take care of the young generation and prepare it for the social struggle." Of course, only very rare loners could think this way among the almost exclusively bourgeois Tatar intelligentsia in terms of their class composition. In Uzbekistan, not only could there be nothing of the kind then, but the national intelligentsia was represented by only a few units for the entire three million Uzbek people. That is why in 1905, namely, the Tatars, opened several schools in Uzbekistan, which differed from the previous Muslim schools in that they began to study not only medieval theology, but also the same sciences as in Russian and European schools in general. year, the year of reaction, and until 1917, a small number of such schools increased extremely weakly. New in the national education of the region during this time was only the opening in its two main cities (Tashkent and Samarkand) of evening courses for natives. True, the number of Russian-native schools increased to 60 too much, the rank-and-file teachers, in general, were not at all distinguished by russification zeal, but these schools could not give any significant results due to their too small number for such a vast region and the number of students in them. It is clear that women from this miserable fund of public education did not get even a crumb. In Bukhara, the Khiva part of Uzbekistan, which had its own unusually backward government, dependent on Russia, until the proclamation of Soviet power there were only initial ones, old Muslim schools, which taught only one cramming of the Qur'an, incomprehensible, written in Arabic, and secondary schools, which taught the ancient theology and philosophy. And these schools were there too. exclusively! small, so that the population of one and a half million of this part of Uzbekistan, which includes more than half of the entire Uzbek people, were almost without exception illiterate. with the exception of the clan aristocracy, employees and wealthy merchants. Since the 60s of the last century, the Bukhara government has completely abandoned spending on public education. Educational institutions began to exist exclusively on the income of those capitals and estates (the so-called waqf lands), which were donated specifically for these purposes according to the wills of various philanthropists. what government ruled over the greater half of the Uzbek people who lived in, in the words of DI Logofet, who visited it in 1907, "a country of powerlessness forgotten by God and people." “Hardly anywhere in the whole world,” he says in his book “The Land of Lawlessness” —there is in its general mass a darker and downtrodden population, as we see in the Bukhara possessions. At the same time, he continues to say that the Russian government has not yet had a hand in public education in anything. ”The position of women in this part of Uzbekistan, hopelessly poor and dark, was, of course, even more humiliated. from expenditures on public education, as the already indicated reason!; the universal and complete darkness of the people, the poor was the second economic reason for it, generated by the same pre-revolutionary emir government. Its regional leaders and the entire administrative gang scattered around the area showed their official activity by illegally squeezing out a lot of taxes from both the poor and the average peasant, turning the latter into the first in two or three years. In addition to the four types of tax established by Muslim law (Sharia): 1) a tenth or sixth part from the harvest; 2) collection of oo> all livestock and goods bought and sold at the bazaar; 3) collection from any goods brought to the bazaar, 4) the poll tax collected from each Muslim head, in addition to all this, according to the rule established by the local administration, by extortions taxation was imposed on all bridges, and bridges, and river crossings, and orchards, and vegetable gardens, and every head of cattle, camel, horse, donkey and every pack brought by a peasant to the bazaar, and every weighing in the same bazaar and water required here to irrigate the field. It seems only the air alone was not imposed with duties here, but how barbarously the local authorities ravaged all these legal and superlawful types of extortions! Instead of the established tenth or sixth of the harvest, a quarter, third and even half were taken, since the collector determined the size of the peasant's harvest arbitrarily and categorically (undeniable). Moreover, since the donation from the harvest was collected not in grain, but in money and not at the market price of grain, but according to the established by the administration, in the end result, with this method, almost always half of the Dvina of the entire harvest passed into the hands of this administration itself. It was no better for the peasants-cattle breeders. One such farmer, who lived exclusively by sheep breeding and had half a hundred and a half (heads of rams, told Logofet how much he pays taxes for the herd: “From me, he says, they took 50 rams last year. That year I had 90 heads left, and the Gopyat took 50 heads from them. ”All these taxes, fees and fines (the latter were imposed for every, even the most insignificant (act), were collected with merciless severity. Such a system, enriching the administrative pack, led the whole country to complete impoverishment ', being at the same time the reason why the population, never guaranteed against the seizure of its property by the authorities, was completely indifferent to the state of its economy, almost not caring about its increase, knowing in advance that most it will go into the bottomless pockets of the administration. ”The submissive and for centuries downtrodden population of the vast Bukhara Khanate, which, as we have already said, was a large half of the Uzbek people, from year to year more and more destitute, resignedly carried all this terrible, unbearable craving, until the great and victorious revolutionary struggle of the Russian workers and peasants showed the peasants of Bukhara the path of liberation. And in 1920, together with the Red Army, they once and for all cleared their homeland, rich in productive forces, but deeply unhappy, of its age-old parasites.
4. The woman of Uzbekistan after the revolution
"Ar'vat" - in Russian, literally, "nakedness", that is, what needs to be covered, how to hide nakedness, what is indecent to show to people — this is how the word “woman” sounded in Turkestan in the language of official relations, the language of its civil and religious culture — Arabic. It seems that there was no more humiliating name for a woman in humanity True, the Arabs had and still retained for the concept of "woman" such words as "imra" from the Semitic word "im" - "mother" and "nisa", formed from "nnis" - "nanny, nanny", peasant means, again, an older sister. Only a perverted urban culture created by the merchant feudal class of medieval Persia and Arabia, only! this culture, which subsequently spread along with Islam to Turkestan, pushed the words "nisa" and "imra" into the personal family life, introducing its own new word into the language of civil relations instead. A woman, as it were, has ceased to be called a woman. They began to call her arvat — nudity, respectively, with every concealment and concealment of it. A culture that has developed such an attitude, sufficiently developed, woven into one whole with religion, has grown together with people to such an extent that the thought of a change in the position of a woman simply could not come to mind, and if it did, it would seem That is why, it was so difficult for workers and women workers in the field of women's emancipation to develop their business, started and led by the Communist Party since the establishment of Soviet power in the region in 1920, but most energetically developed by the women's department since 1923, those. since the cleansing of Uzbekistan from the gangs of counter-revolutionaries-Basmachi. As expected, the cause of the liberation of a woman evokes persistent opposition not only from the teachers and guardians of the old culture - the mullahs, who turned Bukhara into one of its world centers, as well as clan elders, etc. very influential people in Uzbekistan, but also on the part of a significant part of the male half of the Uzbek people. Despite all this, the achievement, in spite of all this, of very significant results in the field of her liberation, the woman of Uzbekistan owes primarily to the exceptional tact shown by the Communist Party at every step when performing this unusually difficult Thanks to this, within three years, what seemed feasible before the revolution not earlier than in several decades was achieved. The Soviet power and the Communist Party, having restored the importance of women in Uzbekistan, equalizing her rights with men, won for the Uzbek woman a rather wide place in life Several years t Now, who had the right to live only in the backyards, the Uzbek now, together with the man, rules her homeland. Already in 1925, 9 Uzbek women were members of the Central Executive Committee of Uzbekistan, several dozen worked as members in the executive committees of the region and in the collegia of the people's commissariats. Every year the number of women increases with significant leaps. Meeting of the Women's Department in a large village in the Tashkent Region. Peshkientechin in councils. If in 1924, as a result of only one year of work on the emancipation of women in Uzbekistan, 200 Uzbek women were elected to the councils of the region, then in the next 25 there were already about 1,500 of them, and in 26 more than 4,000, amounting to 13 percent of all members x). Moreover, some of the councils of this country of women's slavery and humiliation are headed by Uzbek women. There were 6 such councils with women as chairpersons in 25, but in 26, already 20. In this last year, Uzbek women showed tremendous activity in the elections to councils. They vigorously took away those seeking to get into the councils of bays (kulaks), bribe-takers, expelled from the meeting wives who were deprived of the right to elect. The greatest activity was shown by women who received land in 1925-26. land reform, as well as the wives of farm laborers. In general, the proletarian stratum of the Uzbek peasantry — farm laborers and poor people — are ahead of the rest of the strata in matters of equality for women. Almost all of them brought their wives to elective meetings and helped themselves to fight the bai. The Baysky element, already very angry, is even more agitated against the poor for their widespread emancipation of their wives. Finding fault with this, Bai declares emancipation as apostasy from the faith and the nation. Using this accusation as a legitimate pretext for a merciless struggle, the bais and the most backward elements of the kishlak often go as far as beatings, and sometimes even to the murder of liberators and the liberated. Thus, having become one of the factors of the class struggle, the process of the woman's liberation forces the Uzbek woman to participate in this struggle shoulder to shoulder with. as for the peasant women who want to live completely independently ', without a husband, namely widows and divorced, or who have left a difficult marriage and do not want to remarry, then they received, previously completely unaccessible for them, the opportunity to organize themselves into female artels, agricultural or agricultural. When the land reform was carried out in the Fergana region in 1926, land was also allotted at the request for indie formal (single) female farms. There were 52 such women's farms in only one Fergana district with allotments from 2 to 18 tanapov per capita, that is, according to our measure, from 1/3 D ° 3 dessiatines. The majority received plots of 4 and 6 tanapas, that is, tithe. Up to 500 women's farms have been formed throughout Uzbekistan. Together with the land, Uzbek women also received agricultural implements and thus became independent owners. With the habit of the powerlessness of women rooted in Turkestan, the allotment of land to her made a revolution in the minds of the dekhkans (peasantry). The Uzbek women allotted with land united at that time in 11 artels. The first year of independent labor gave good results: the artels reaped a high harvest, acquired new agricultural works. equipment, 6 artels of Fergana region received a tractor. These artels now employ 8 Uzbek tractor drivers who have completed special courses in the city of Namangan. In the Samarkand region, the so-called "Union of Koshchi" takes an active part in the organization of women's agricultural artels. This union arose as follows: For an organized struggle against the kulak, in the republics of Central Asia: Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, the poorest peasant the population unites in the union "Koshchi" (in Russian "land-worker"), which sets its tasks: to protect the interests of the poor and to organize economic assistance to the low-powered farms of the poor. The Union takes upon itself the organization of mutual assistance, takes an active part in the implementation of the land reform begun in 1925, provides assistance to those farms that received land under this reform, campaigns for raising agriculture by applying new forms of land cultivation, displacing plowing a wooden plow, the cultivation of the field with a "ketmen" —a big hoe, etc. Finally, the union conducts all kinds of cultural and educational work among its members, for example, on March 8, 27 and 28. He opened women's schools for the eradication of illiteracy in a number of villages in the Tashkent region. Calling on the farmer for broad participation, both in the union itself and in other urgently needed branches of public work, for example, in the kishlak council, its sections, cooperation, the school council, the union of "Koshchi" explains to the Uzbek woman the tremendous importance attached to her activities in the new life by the Soviet power, seeks to involve her in the building of the country by all means, etc. Soviet cooperative construction is one of the most important phenomena of social life, striving to be reborn into socialist forms, very successfully involves both a farmer and a city dweller.In the conditions of Uzbekistan, where the ingrained prejudice still does not allow an ordinary Uzbek woman to go to the market, and sometimes even to the store, the cooperative bodies of Uzbekistan have created an original phenomenon: cooperative women's shops ... It began with the fact that at the end of 1925, under the leadership of the Central Asian office of the Centrosoyuz, at first, one cooperative shop was set up, selling especially for women. The experience turned out to be extremely successful, showing the vital importance of expanding the business started. Two years later, there were already 17 such women's shops, which involved up to 4,000 Uzbek women in consumer cooperation by the beginning of 27. All these shops are run by female workers, of whom more than half are Uzbeks. Women's shops have justified themselves not only as a way to involve indigenous women in cooperative construction, but also from the commercial side. All shops are trading at break-even rates, giving a large turnover. Almost all women's shops have shop commissions, in which Uzbek women, members of the cooperative, are actively working. It is interesting to note that at the same time women's shops are also places of cultural work among women. Many of them have special red corners. In the cooperative shops in Tashkent, nooks for mothers and children are set aside with a cheaper sale of goods, with the exception of toys, the income from which goes to the fund for the protection of mothers and infants. Cooperation bodies also work on the construction of women's artels. They have created 18 handicraft-industrial artels, involving hundreds of women workers. In the village "Lunacharskom", near Tashkent, there is a splendid female dairy artel with over 80 members, with a hundred heads of milk yield. There are (at least 11) sericulture artels (x), seamstresses. Since 1927, the cooperative union of Uzbekistan began joint work with the People's Commissariat for Health on the protection of motherhood and infancy. In addition to the already mentioned participation in the organization of corners of mother and child. The co-union organized a permanent d) The People's Commissariat of Uzbekistan introduced special lending to women-silkworms with corn and money and, in addition, organizes the sale of cocoons. Pai exhibition-traveling on the care of a pregnant woman. From the profits of the Union, a number of children's consultations are maintained. Together with the People's Commissariat of Health, cooperative bodies also work in the organization of special commissions on the ground for the dissemination of sanitary and hygienic knowledge. Finally, trading medicines in villages, Uzbekistan's cooperation In the past, we saw what an extremely unhealthy environment women and children are surrounded by in Uzbekistan, which is why the institutions for the protection of mothers and babies, which are especially necessary here, both by the party and by the relevant bodies of the Soviet In spite of significant difficulties in the past, connected with the years of struggle against counter-revolution, the struggle that ended only in 1923, despite a number of difficulties of a different nature, the People's Commissariat of Health of Uzbekistan has already significantly deployed children's institutions. From 6 such institutions that existed in 1924, by the end of 26, their number increased to 30. There are several homes for a weakened child maintained by the Red Crescent (corresponds to our Red Cross), a large children's sanatorium (in the vicinity of Tashkent - Agalyk ). A number of colonies were organized — a school sanatorium (in Khorezm and Khiva), a children's hospital in Samarkand. The activity of school dispensaries has been expanded. Since 1926, all this work has been largely coordinated (coordinated) by the Council for the Protection of Children's Health under the People's Commissariat of Health of the Uzbek SSR. At the end of the same year, courses were organized for midwives and patronage nurses from the indigenous population. So far, almost exclusively Russian and Tatar women work in obstetrics. At the obstetric points, in the maternity hospital and in the gynecological hospital (for women's diseases), Uzbek women work as nurses. The network of organizations for women is growing along with women's clubs, and is growing quite rapidly. When in 1923 Uzbekistan was cleared of counter Basmachi revolutionaries, the organization of women's clubs began. In 23 itself, only one such club appeared, and a year later there were already 19; by the end of 26 - 34. The activities of women's clubs in Uzbekistan are remarkably diverse. A clear picture of the club life is given by the report of the head of the Tashkent women's club, from which we cite extracts: “Before organizing this Tashkent club,” writes the head of comrade Popova, “we had to talk a lot with local workers, because they were all against its organization and they said that this was a waste of money and that women should never be attracted there. ”“ The club was organized 25 — IV — 24 years. From the very beginning, we organized a children's consultation in order to help attract Uzbek women to the club. But the first days we waited in vain for visitors. Nobody went to the club. Then we held a meeting with 8 women party members on the methods of attracting Uzbek women to the club. It was decided that the communists should go and agitate among Uzbek women to visit the club. This measure gave good results. ”“ After 4-5 days, the audience began to appear, but 2-3 people. in a day. At first, we had 25-30 women who attended the club. Moreover, I must say that we managed to attract them only to the courtyard, since they did not dare to go inside the building. Now that women began to visit the club, we began to collect them in a called loud-reading room (library) and the first conversations were conducted mainly on the importance of this club ... and advised them to enroll in club members and learn to read and write. At first, women were terribly afraid of joining the club, but they still don’t take membership cards. ”“ At the end of the first half of the year, we decided to open the first artel, a blanket, since Uzbek women are most familiar with this work. The blanket artel was opened by a collective of unemployed and all funds were given from there. I must say that at first all funds were issued exclusively by the women's department. We didn’t get a single kopeck from other places. Everything was paid by the women's department, including doctors, nurses, school and workshop expenses. This is no longer the case. About six months later, a blanket artel was opened, and then a sewing workshop ... "" Currently, we have 496 members of the club. Of these, 410 are Uzbek, 66 are Tartars, and 20 of other nationalities. In terms of social status: wives and daughters of laborers — 258, female workers — 92, dehkans — 68, small traders — 76. Don't be surprised at the last circumstance. We have merchants — terrible poor people. From the very beginning there were 8 party members, and now there are 54. ”“ All the work of our club is divided into sections. There are the following sections: political education, protection of mothers and infants, cooperative and youth sections. Each section is headed by a head with special knowledge. For example, at the head of the section for the protection of mothers and infants is a doctor who is in charge of the children's clinic ... We have circles - a political circle, a circle of mothers and infancy, choral, music, a circle of MOPR and Russian literacy ... "" The second line of work, - This is a massive ... mainly consists of reports, lectures, which are weekly. Then, excursions ... A lecture is read, nair., About electricity, then an excursion to the hydroelectric station is arranged. If a medical lecture is given, then they take them on an excursion to the appropriate medical institution. ”“ We have not only the task of the club preparing female workers, releasing female workers for public work. Besides this First, we pay attention to the everyday life of an Uzbek woman ... Uzbek women receive information on sanitation and hygiene, transfer it from the club to their home life. ”“ We have now opened two new factories. The club gives women workers to the factories ... "" Now about the promotions. Of the club members, there are now nurses in kindergartens, then teachers in educational programs. There are no Uzbek heads in kindergartens yet. But there are Uzbek educators. They are all members of our club. ”“ We have 2 schools — one for the elimination of illiteracy, the other of an advanced type ... at an advanced school — 32 people. The craving for learning is enormous, especially on the part of young people "... Women's clubs are excellent at helping the party in its struggle against the veil and veil. The number of Uzbek women who once said goodbye to these harmful and painful appendages to clothing reached 3 by the day of March 8, 1927. thousand, and by the middle of the year up to one and a half thousand, which is already about half of the female world of the country. By arranging, extremely interesting for residents, the so-called "demonstration weddings" with the insce-Leninsky corner at the women's department of the Kashka-Darvin region with a new life, members of the clubs, and in this very successful way, they help the party and the Komsomol to popularize (spread to the masses) a new way of life. The unusually increased desire of young people to study, noted by the head of the club, is one of the features of ours! time. We constantly observe this phenomenon, and, moreover, among all decisively nationalities of the USSR. The thirst for learning is more and more satisfied by the gradual but steady expansion and growth of schooling, both in quality and in quantity. In Uzbekistan, the People's Commissariat for Education, having almost doubled the number * of schools in 1925-26, 3)> set as its striking task for the next three years "an all-out struggle for the quality of the 'school business." In Central Asia, taking into account the entrenched views of the local population, since then it is necessary to open special schools for girls. The number of such schools, encompassing only 6 schools for all girls, is still very small, but it is steadily increasing every year by 2-3 times and is making big gains among the dekhans of Uzbekistan, where, in general, the percentage of literacy of the entire population, to at the beginning of 1927 it was expressed in 4.6о / о. The average female educational institutions at the beginning of 1928 were 17; 810 girls and women of the indigenous population (Uzbeks and Tajiks) studied there. Further graduations by the Uzbek Women's Institute for the education of new cadres, teachers, will significantly contribute to the quantitative and qualitative growth of schools for girls. The institute, the director of which is an Uzbek candidate of the party, graduating 12 teachers in 26, organized at the same time summer courses for the training of teachers, which in turn graduated one and a half hundred teachers, of which 80 are Uzbek *) • 60 Uzbek women are local students; University. About two hundred Uzbek women receive party education at the Central Asian Communist University and communist schools. Particular attention was paid to the vocational and technical education of the indigenous woman. • The existing 4 female technical schools teach more than two hundred Uzbek and Tajik women, a weaving technical school — more than a hundred. Uzbekistan was previously an exclusively resource base for Russia. The industry created in Soviet Uzbekistan, namely textile and silk-winding, requires the use, mainly, of female labor. directives of the 2nd Congress of Soviets, Uzbekistan in 1926 (on the work of trade unions) was as follows: “Noting the weak participation of women in production, especially from the indigenous population, their low qualifications, living conditions and high female unemployment, to strengthen the involvement of women in production, to improve the qualifications of female labor, by strengthening the registration of women in the brigade factory apprenticeship. To increase the percentage of women in vocational courses, to raise work to improve the living conditions of female workers through the organization of nurseries, kindergartens, etc. Strengthen the promotion of women to Soviet and professional work. ”The implementation of this directive resulted in the involvement of 1,700 Uzbek women in production by the end of 26. and almost three thousand by the end of the 27th. We saw) how fast the entry of Uzbek women into Soviet work is. But the women's trade union movement is also sprouting quite fast. In April 1925, the number of Uzbek trade union women slightly exceeded 700 (Russian women 14,000), but by October of the same year, that is, within 6 months, their number more than doubled, reaching 1,520 (Russians and Tatars, 21,000), and a year later, by October 26, reached 2,000 (Russians and Tatars, 25,000). place also in the design of the highest governing bodies of the trade union movement. So in the Central Committee and the Regional Council of Trade Unions there are 61 workers, or 12 percent of the total composition of the Central Committee and the ISPS. In total, up to 40 thousand women are in party and Soviet work, of which about 8 thousand are communists and almost 6 thousand delegates. is growing at giant strides: in 1925 there were only 202 Komsomol members, in 26 about 1,100. to 8 mouth of 1928, the women's Komsomol of Uzbekistan is numbered almost 15 thousand. In addition to the Central Asian Communist University and the communist schools with hundreds of girls and young women studying in them, the best Komsomol is forged by the Uzbek House of Education, located in Moscow, in the premises of the palace-mansion (b. Ryabushinsky) on Spiridonovka. The house, where 3 people of the family of a millionaire used to live, now freely accommodates up to 360 souls of Uzbek youth of both sexes, making them the best fighters for a bright future for an Uzbek woman. Turning an Uzbek woman from a slave into a full-fledged person, the Soviet government protects her young, still fragile freedom nearby , if necessary, strict protective laws. Murder of a wife is punishable by shooting; forcing to marry, imprisoned for up to 3 years; who married his daughter for a kalym, and who also encroached on the honor of the girl, is imprisoned for 5 years; an attacker on the honor of a woman and accused of pandering loses his freedom for 3 years; refusal of alimony leads to a 6-month imprisonment or "yshtaf" (fine) of 500 rubles. Much work has been done to familiarize women with the basics of Soviet legislation. This work did not pass without a trace In the People's Commissariat of Justice of Uzbekistan, the influx of applications on everyday issues is increasing. There are cases when a dekhkanka; divorced from her husband 5-6 years ago, comes and submits an application for the recovery of part of the property from him. After the re-elections in 1927, the number of women-jurors increased to 2.8 sr * People, mainly Uzbeks. The Commission for Improving the Life of a Woman of Uzbekistan managed to ensure that the law punished not only those who give kalym, but also those who take it. In addition, an amendment was made to the procedural code, according to which the investigation of domestic crimes must be conducted without the victim's statement, which is of great importance for Uzbekistan. The great popularity of the people's courts allowed the government of Uzbekistan to issue a ruling. (at the beginning of 1928) on the liquidation of spiritual (so-called Kazi courts) throughout the Republic ... __. A growing network of legal consultations, thousands of delegates, thousands of administrative and party workers, and behind them the entire state apparatus of Soviet Uzbekistan stand guard over each Looking at the process of liberation of a woman in Central Asia as a whole, you get the impression that the female half of the population of this huge country, as it were, is emerging from oblivion, being born into the world of cheerful work, into a world full of the broadest possibilities.
