1. General outline of the ABSSR.
The Autonomous Bashkir Socialist Soviet Republic is located on the eastern outskirts of the European part of the USSR in the basin of the Belaya and Ural rivers. The borders of the ABSSR are: from the north and east - the Ural region, from the south - Orenburg province, from the west - Samara province. and the Tatar ASSR. According to the surface arrangement, the edge can be divided into three parts. The most important of them, the Ural Upland, consists of a rather complex group of ridges, largely covered with forest, and represents a relatively sharp contrast with the other two — the steppe Trans-Ural in the east and the hilly valley of the Cis-Urals in the west. Of the rivers flowing in the territory of the Bashkir Republic, the most significant is the r. White, wholly owned by the country; like most others, it is only shipable in parts. The eastern and northern parts of the country are rich in shallow lakes, while the entire southern part is irrigated almost exclusively by the system of tributaries of the river. Ural. The lakes of the Trans-Ural steppe abound in fish of some industrial importance. The climate of the country is rather temperate, with some features of a continental character — very high temperatures in summer and just as low — in winter. The average winter temperature is below -15 °, and summer is above -21 °. Due to the climatic features of the region, two types of winds should be noted: the so-called storm and dry wind. The steppe part of the country is most susceptible to the blizzard. In winter, a blizzard causes great harm to the population. A suddenly rising wind blows with terrible force, sometimes for several days. The cattle that are on grazing and caught in the steppe by such a hurricane run tens of miles in the wind and die in masses, falling into ravines and falling from exhaustion. The dry wind, the southeastern summer wind, is distinguished by exceptional dryness and heat, which adversely affects the crops. The exceptional richness of the ABSSR vegetation is due to the great complexity of the relief and the corresponding variety of climatic conditions. The mountainous landscape is replete with pine needles, while the entire western foothills are covered with deciduous forests. Forests cover about 37% of the total area. The ABSSR also owes its diversity of geographical conditions to its fauna; huge forests, mountains and steppes give shelter to thousands of different animals. The largest inhabitant of the forests is the elk, which is extremely popular for winter ski hunting. There are also several breeds of deer and roe deer, and small game animals - squirrel, marten, ermine, weasel, ferret. (An interesting characteristic feature of the Bashkir fauna is the joint presence of polar tundra animals with some typical representatives of the steppe zone of southern Russia. The former include the ptarmigan and reindeer, the latter — the marmot, little bustard, etc.). The ABSSR covers an area of ​​157.662 sq. kya. with a population of 21/2 million. In terms of population density, the ABSSR can be attributed to the number of moderately populated areas (there are 16 people per one square klya). Although the tribal composition of the population is quite complex, the indigenous inhabitants of the region are Bashkirs; they, together with their kindred Tatars, Meshcheryaks and Votyaks, make up 53.75% of the total population, and, like the most ancient inhabitants of the country, are widespread. The rest of the population in percentage terms is drawn as follows: Great Russians — 34.35%, Ukrainians — 3.0%, Mari — 2.91D, Chuvash — 2.8%, Mordovians — 1.8%, Belarusians — 1.1%, others 2.3%. It is difficult to establish the exact time of the settlement of the Bashkirs in the Urals region. It is only known that in the 9th century they already lived there. The Bashkirs are a people of mixed Mongol-Finnish origin. The annexation of Bashkiria to Russia dates back to the middle of the 16th century. When annexed, the Bashkirs had to experience the usual program of enslavement with all the phenomena characteristic of the colonial policy of that time. The "insignificant tax" imposed on the newly conquered country by the Moscow government triggered a desperate protest of the population, expressed in a series of uprisings, followed by brutal reprisals (the number of large, organized uprisings reaches 80). The first uprising broke out in 1645 under the slogan of restoring national independence. This was the beginning of a bloody and unequal struggle that lasted for more than a century and a half. The Bashkirs "rebelled" incessantly and incessantly they were beaten by the ten thousand Kalmyk freemen organized and incited by the tsarist government. Invading the country, she plundered and burned villages, slaughtered the inhabitants and drove away women and cattle.In the Peter's era, the ruin of the country becomes systematic and reaches colossal proportions, by plundering land and forests. The answer is the uprising of 1735, which lasted 6 years. Up to 30 thousand Bashkirs were executed, sent to hard labor, enslaved with their families. By a series of government decrees, the Bashkirs within their country were placed in incredibly difficult conditions in relation to the Meshcheryaks and Tatars, who were given the best Bashkir lands as their property. The fictitious self-government was destroyed, and all the power to govern the country was transferred to the hands of Russian officials, who finally ruined the remnants of the indigenous Bashkirs through impudent abuses and predatory policies. Thus, the Bashkirs, the legitimate owners of the region, were, in fact, outlawed and, living on their territory, in fact, deprived of all rights, almost even the right to exist. But the people set on the path of extinction did not surrender, and rose two more times, trying with their last strength to throw off the royal yoke. The Pugachev movement was the last. The ethnic strife sown by the tsarist policy played a role: the Tatars, Meshcheryaks and Votyaks supported the tsarist troops, and the attempt ended in a terrible slaughter. More than 50,000 Bashkirs fled in whole families to the Kyrgyz steppes. While the “liquidation” of the Bashkirs was successfully unfolding in the country, the tsarist government took a “diplomatic step” by placing the wives and children of the fugitives at the disposal of the Kirghiz. The agreement took place. The Bashkirs were partly killed, partly given over to the Russians. This is, in general terms, the mournful chronicle of the heroic struggle of the Bashkirs for liberation. From that time on, the population ceases to actively participate in the events: it retreats to the mountains of the Southern Urals, away from the military-industrial centers of Russian culture, and leads a closed existence there. The abolition of serfdom caused a new plunder of the Bashkir lands. When delimiting, the norms of allotments are reduced, due to which the resettlement of the Great Russian peasantry from the densely populated central provinces is carried out. Bashkir clans are finally attached to their location and placed under the authority of zemstvo chiefs. Even mullahs are approved by the authorities, and theological schools are subordinate to the synod. The national movement froze completely, although during the entire 19th century. individual collisions and excesses occur. It is clear that under these conditions there is no need to talk about the possibility for the Bashkirs of any kind of cultural progress. The ban on the construction of schools and mosques further strengthened the situation. Not wanting to learn from their enslavers, the people lost even the beginnings of their own tribal culture, submitting to the conditions of the changed life. The development of industry in the country not only did not improve their situation, but on the contrary: the capital that came, accompanied by the most terrible exploitation of the population, and the transfer of the country's best natural resources into the hands of the newcomer, produced a pernicious and destructive effect. The old forms and methods of economic management collapsed, not presenting the possibility of an easy transition to new ones. And so it happened that the Bashkir, being forced into the interior of the country, cut off from the best lands and holdings, was condemned to starvation and extinction. Therefore, the only progress in the country was a monstrously progressive mortality rate. This was the 'state of the country, inherited by the Soviet regime from tsarism. Until the middle of the last century, the Bashkirs remained primarily cattle breeders. The vast expanses of virgin lands represented magnificent pastures, making it easy to maintain herds of thousands. Despite the fact that for a long time each uprising cost the Bashkirs thousands of cattle, even before the decline in the country's economic well-being began, a simple Bashkir had 30-40 horses, and many rich people had a figure of one and a half, two thousand. Such a number of horses in an individual Bashkir farm was explained by the fact that the horse was the only way to travel in the country, and its meat and milk were the main food. Cattle in purely Bashkir farms are still less important in personal consumption, and dairy farming pursues mainly industrial goals — the trade in butter. Despite the importance of cattle breeding in the life of a Bashkir, cattle are kept in an ancient nomadic way: herds and herds of Bashkirs are grazed all year round. Livestock care does not exist in the usual sense. Approximately from April to October, the nomadic movement lasts, that is, the slow movement of cattle across the steppe; the wandering place is usually chosen as far from the dwelling as possible in order to preserve the grass for wintering. In winter, the herds, left to their own devices, somehow extract grass from under the snow, endure terrible blizzards, and starve and die in the icy conditions. from cattle breeding as from the main occupation. Ancillary trades — hunting and fishing — declined, as did cattle breeding, and for the same reasons. Gradually settling and moving away from nomadic life, the Bashkirs switched to agriculture. But the difficulty of this adaptation, associated with a radical breakdown of all centuries-old skills and traditions, was so great that it seemed that the Bashkirs were generally incapable of agriculture. Extremely characteristic is the ironic remark of one ethnographer that "behind the sowing Bashkir a horse with a birch tied to its tail is dragging its branches, the branches of which are somehow swept by the grain." This is partly true when applied to the past.But after all, the transition is complete. The Bashkirs became farmers. True, until now, agriculture in any Bashkir village is much more primitive than in the neighboring Great Russian. Along with the threefields, there is even a fallow system in some places. After a single plowing with a heavy wooden saban, sowing is carried out, often even without boron; 'forging. Bread is threshed by horses trampling sheaves, or by a cart loaded with stones, which; 'They carry back and forth in sheaves. One of the oldest subsidiary trades was beekeeping, especially in the mountain-forest part, where each family had boards hanging from the trees. These are the main occupations of the Bashkirs. Their dwellings are different: -in the mountain-forest part it is , for the most part, log buildings, often of the log type, while in the steppe - felt; huts, dugouts, semi-dugouts and adobe huts. Household utensils are very simple. The dishes are almost exclusively wooden, partly bast. The steppe Bashkirs still have leather. It is characteristic that pottery is not at all used by the Bashkirs. Dairy and flour dishes, mainly boiled ones, prevail in the food of the Bashkirs. Bread is being replaced by flat cakes and pancakes — baked or boiled .. Meat, which until recently was the main food product (dried and dried horse meat, partly beef), is found almost exclusively among the rich. Vegetables are eaten only in the western and northwestern parts of Bashkiria. An industrial bias on the farm reduces the consumption of poultry and dairy products, but tea, which is very popular with the Bashkirs, is extremely common. According to their religious views, the Bashkirs are Muslims. In remote corners, where beliefs are especially primitive, they have the character of a mixture of Muslim cult with the rudiments of Orthodoxy and primitive shamanism. Mullah was the highest person in the village. Spiritual father and mediator between people and God, he was a miracle worker, doctors and teacher. Events such as dry wind, hailstorms, and the death of livestock made the inhabitants turn to him. At school, the Bashkirs met the same mullah. The tsarist government allowed only theological schools - "mekteb". On top of this, throughout Bashkiria there were 2-3 gymnasiums for the "privileged" and Russian schools, in which they tried to erase the very memory of the Bashkir language. But the "mekteb" with his mullah was also under the jurisdiction of the synod. A feature of the social structure of the Bashkirs is the presence of very strong and very durable remnants of the family life. The clan life existed for them for an extremely long time, having the clan in the role of the main social unit, headed by the eldest in the clan. Under the influence of historical conditions, the clans gradually split into smaller groups, sub-clans ("tyuby"), repeating in general terms the clan structure. In the 18th century. childbirth gradually disappears. By a decree in 1739, management was transferred to volost foremen, who were appointed by the regional administration. But the demarcation of the land, the allocation of the so-called. "Dachas", that is, separate plots of land in the joint possession of a whole "tyuba", stopped further fragmentation, turning the "tyuba" into a geographically separate group, economically and by kinship, and sometimes consisting of several villages "Tyuba" ob ' unites "ares" —groups of families that have survived almost everywhere. Marriage within the arena is considered unacceptable. In family events, not only the family takes part, but the whole "ara", helping the groom pay the ransom for the bride ("kalym"), participating in the organization of the commemoration, etc. "It should be noted that neither the" ara " nor are the "tyuba" united by the person at the head of them, but only consist of separate independent families — this is their fundamental difference from the untouched clan structure. ”It is characteristic that the members of the“ area ”differ among themselves not by the degree of kinship, and by age: on the elders - fathers, uncles, mothers, and the younger ones - brothers, relatives and cousins, sisters, etc. There are a number of ancestral traditions that the Bashkirs hold tightly. Such are, for example, an unusually interesting and peculiar marriage ceremony , the national spring festival "Sabantuy", accompanied by horse races and wrestling competitions, in some places preserved falconry. This is a household tribute to the past of the country. A number of fundamental differences in the way of life have the inhabitants of the Bor canton and the western part of the Ufa. , bash the kirs of this region have gone much further along the path of the disintegration of the tribal life; the strongest ancestral traditions are almost erased here. A very important occupation of the population is gardening, which is almost not observed in other places. This exclusion once again confirms the dependence of the general life picture of the region on the geographical location of individual parts, the proximity of cultural centers and their nature. 

II. Bashkir before Soviet power.
Having briefly outlined the situation and the nature of the everyday environment of the pre-revolutionary Bashkir woman, we move on to our immediate task, to describe a number of pictures of her everyday life. Their general background is inhospitable and reminds incessantly of the hard path of an enslaved toiler ... Bashkir is a child, Bashkir is a wife and a bash! pickaxe - mother, these are the three main stages of this path. The birth of a girl is not a joy in the family. The “grandmother” who has just born baby washes it and, having swaddled it, puts it in a cradle woven from birch bark, at the bottom of which a layer of powdered bark serves as a mattress for him, at the same time absorbing his secretions. In the shake, the child is laced up so that he cannot fall out, and in this form accompanies the mother everywhere, if the place of her daytime work is relatively remote from home. Usually, a mother breastfeeds her baby for a very long time, because, according to the Bashkirs, not having milk is a shame for the mother. At about the age of two, the child leaves the cradle and, having gained relative freedom, walks or crawls wherever he pleases. The mother can no longer give the girl her time, her hands are needed by the household. It's also good if, while working in the yard or in the house itself, she can call out to the child from time to time, and if he does not answer, go in search of him. But in the summer, on the pasture or in the field, she is deprived of this consolation, and the girl plays alone in the yard. Of course, in cases where there are more children in the family, the situation becomes easier, because the elders look after the younger ones. This, however, only applies to girls: a Bashkir boy should not look after children. From an early age, the girl begins to work, often performing work that is unbearable for her age and health. All household chores are on her shoulders. She helps the mother 'babysit the children, cook food, clean the house and the yard'. In the morning she gets up before everyone else, milks the mares and prepares food for sleeping. In addition, she must help her father in the field, in the forest and decisively in all his works; where there is some dirty and unpleasant work, there is immediately the application of its work. But all this remains invaluable: not only does she not deserve gratitude, but on the contrary - every family that feeds a girl believes that she feeds her for free and the only compensation is "kalym", the ransom for her parents when she marries. The work performed by a woman is essentially little noticeable to the male eye: it does not bring tangible benefits to the household. This is not a job of obtaining, but of serving, and therefore is considered a despicable and insignificant job. The girl is exploited by the men of her family, like a farm laborer, shamelessly and with the consciousness of her right to do so. Household, livestock and children — this is what completely fills the life of a Bashkir from the moment of her birth to her marriage. The whole way of her family life is based on unquestioning obedience to the eldest man in the family. He disposes of it at his own discretion. The time will come, and he will marry her to anyone and how he wants. Despite the apparent external freedom of the Bashkir woman in comparison with women of other Muslim nations, her position is both difficult and humiliating; a long series of offensive legal restrictions aimed at emphasizing her dependence and subservience turn her existence into a hopeless slavery. When she marries, she loses any connection with her family, she is no longer a member of the family that nurtured her, she is the property of her husband. In very few families, the girl is sent to study at the mekteb. "Mekteb" is a rural school where children of both sexes from 8-12 years old study. Very often there is no special school building in the village, and the “mekteb” is placed in peasant houses temporarily occupied for this purpose with the consent of the owner. The teacher is a mullah and education is purely religious in nature, limited to reading holy books and studying prayers. What do these prayers and books teach her? Yes, all the same humility, knowledge of "one's place", the same canine tolerance and devotion, obedience in the name of "Allah" and holy tradition, and again patience, because: "The reward is great ... And isn't it; not the joy of being a servant to your master? " With this sad baggage of "useful knowledge" she begins life. With a frightened dark consciousness, littered with scraps of religious texts, with a feeling of inevitable doom to some vague law, she makes the first conscious steps of her “path of the cross”. Here she is taught theory - she does practice at home. All together they create a “good Muslim woman”, a well-trained worker of her future husband. She pays for this "education" with hard work. But now the education is over; the ready bride is waiting for her fate, or rather, the decision of the eldest man in the family. He, in turn, is waiting for a profitable buyer. In general, marriage is allowed for a woman at a very early age; a girl of 14-15 years old is definitely a bride. She is married off against her own 'desire and will. The whole preliminary ceremony usually unfolds like this. A young Bashkir declares to his father about his desire to marry, very often without referring to a specific person - the bride. The father accepts this statement depending on the circumstances, but in most cases favorably. He chooses for his son a "diplomatic mediator," a "long matchmaker," whose duty is to negotiate with the bride's father. If the choice is not made by the groom himself, then the question of the bride is decided immediately. The matchmaker is the confidant of the groom and his family. They consult with him about choosing a bride, about the size and character of the "kalym". When all the questions have been clarified, the "long matchmaker" goes to the intended house, but does not at all reveal his goals. He greets the hosts and, sitting over a treat, conducts a conversation about the most ordinary things. In conversation, through various diplomatic tricks, he collects the information he needs about the age of the bride, the size of the dowry, etc. If this information does not correspond to the groom's plan, then the matchmaker leaves without revealing his cards. It is not uncommon for the owner to immediately guess about the intentions of the visitor and, having learned the name of the groom, puts the matchmaker out the door. This behavior is not considered reprehensible and is even common when the matchmaker is significantly poorer than her family. If successful, the matchmaker continues the conversation and reverently sets out the purpose of his visit. Having named) the name of his principal, he begins courting the father of the bride, convincing him to intermarry with the family of the groom and does not skimp on rave reviews about the wealth, generosity and personal qualities of the groom. After listening to the matchmaker, the owner asks him to temporarily retire and convene a family meeting with the participation of his closest relatives (without women). If the conference is inclined to a positive result, then the size of the kalym is immediately established and other wedding issues are settled. After the unanimous approval of the planned project by the council, the matchmaker is invited and the decision of the meeting is announced in his presence. As a rule, the owner gives him a shirt. Further, the parties are fiercely bargaining. Having reached a preliminary agreement, the matchmaker goes to his principal and reports to him the state of affairs. If the terms of the deal are satisfactory, the father of the groom goes to the father of the bride with a few relatives; moreover, he never stops at the house of the latter, but always somewhere in the neighborhood with his relatives. From here, he directs the second matchmaker to his future relatives, who, in contrast to the first, is called “short”. The “short matchmaker” is responsible for the final settlement of negotiations between the parties. When an agreement is reached, the bride's father invites all the guests to his place through a “short matchmaker”, and the groom's father goes to him with all his retinue, always on horseback. When all the guests are assembled, both matchmakers repeat again in front of everyone all the main points of the agreement. In rare cases, the transaction is notarized in the presence of the mullah. It is characteristic that until this time the young do not see each other and quite often the bride does not know who her groom is. Tradition requires pompous rigor in all wedding ceremonies, and especially from the moment the mullah appears on the stage, all relations between families are clothed in a solemn, official cold. The mulla appears, accompanied by a muezin, and performs taked (betrothal ceremony). First, he asks the groom's father if he will marry the daughter of such and such to his son, then the father of the bride, if he will give her to such and such. Having received an affirmative answer, the mullah makes an entry in the register, and the muezin reads sayings from the Koran. This is where the ceremony ends and the mullah, taking the fee, leaves. After that, the groom gets the right to visit the young woman in the father-in-law's house as a husband, but still cannot take her to him. During the ceremony, a tablecloth is spread on the table in front of the groom's father and a tray is placed on it, where he puts silver change, "for the happiness" of the bride. The father of the latter, in turn, promises to leave part of the kalym in her favor; all the guests also present them with various little things, most often some kind of clothes, after which, having appointed the day for the reception of the “kalym,” the representatives of the groom leave for home. After the expiration of the term, several relatives of the bride go to the groom. After staying 3-4 days, they go, accompanied by the owner, to inspect his livestock. Here they try to choose the best horses and cows for the "kalym"; the owner, of course, resists, offering bad ones. On this basis, there are often serious misunderstandings. This is no longer a tradition, but a purely commercial moment of the ceremony. Finally, the kalym was accepted, and the guests, having received new gifts, take it to the bride's father. After that, the wedding day is appointed. The number of invitees is set exactly and one of the matchmakers bypasses them, passing the invitations. On the day of the wedding, the groom is obliged to give the mother-in-law some valuable gift, called a "show". Usually it is a fur coat, which he brings along, among other things, "small kalym" (intended personally for the bride). Several young people ride on horseback to meet the traveling guests, each of them holding a small bundle of silver money. Having let the guests close enough, the horsemen turn and gallop back to the village, the guests must catch up with them and take away the silver. This ceremony is called - "cat - alypka-su" - salvation of happiness. Those who come are accommodated partly with the bride's father, partly with his relatives; usually several horses are slaughtered and the festival lasts three days. After some time, the groom must arrange a reciprocal reception at his home or, if it is not selected, at his father; only then can he take a wife altogether. However, very often he simply takes her away secretly with or without her consent. This is due to the fact that treating a large number of people is associated with a serious expense, and therefore it is sometimes postponed indefinitely, often up to a year. As for the abduction itself, then, presumably, at one time, with strict exogamy, this was strongly practiced in Bashkiria, since the clan, giving away the woman, appointed a huge "kalym", which forced the groom to resort to kidnapping. If now "taking away" serves only as a means for him to slightly limit wedding expenses, then even 100 years ago it was a valiant tradition that, if successful, relieved him of all payments. In the entire matchmaking and wedding program described above, the bride is the most passive, lack of initiative. Indifferent and submissive, she falls into her husband's house. All scores with her former family are over. She has nowhere to look for support from the moment of her placement in a new family. The only and sovereign master of her life is her husband. This is the second phase of her life. It is considered to be easier. How true this is is difficult to judge. There can hardly be a hard and fast rule here. We only know that, for some reason, without getting married, very often through the fault of the parents, the Bashkir woman finds herself in conditions much worse than life could have brought her from any husband. It happens, for example, like this: the girl's father at one time rejects one or several proposals for his own reasons: most often the reason for the refusal is the insufficient size of the offered kalym. He does not want to be cheap, hoping over time to sell the "product" more expensive. But years pass and the "product" deteriorates, the bride is out of marriageable age, the proposals are no longer repeated; father's commercial calculation did not come true. One fine day, the family, desperate to marry a twenty-year-old "old maid", abruptly changes their attitude towards her. Now they are no longer afraid to break her with any work. If earlier the expected "kalym" served to a certain extent as a restraining principle, forcing households to take care of her even elementary, now they have a full opportunity to compensate for the futility of these worries. She is the subject of bullying and insults for her brothers, for their wives and children; it is periodically exploited mercilessly, sometimes for two or three generations. She has absolutely no place to go, and she does not even think about leaving. Every girl knows and fears this, like a bad dream, “it’s hard to live in farm women; ".. Another Bashkir proverb says," Better an evil husband than a good father. "In a new family, a young woman is immediately shown" her place "; and here, like her father, she cannot sit at the table with everyone, she serves at dinner and eats herself after everyone; she has no right to participate in the general conversation; she is forbidden to laugh and speak loudly. The relationship of a husband to a young wife sometimes takes on the character of unrestrained arbitrariness already at the end of the first month of life together, although this does not at all imply an exceptionally cruel disposition in him. Simply, all everyday traditions, all social laws of the region are aimed at creating such a psychology in which the arbitrariness of men and the complete enslavement of women develop. In doing so, the young husband is right before public morality and before his conscience. It would never occur to anyone to condemn him: he is in "his own right." On the contrary, treating his wife too softly, he risks losing even her respect, dropping his manhood and causing ridicule; true, slu-; teas of an overly soft attitude almost never winds, so such a threat exists only in possibility. If behind all this there was not a centuries-old habit of slavery, it is unlikely that the human body could withstand this role. The cases of suicide known among Bashkir women are almost always explained by the introduction of personal moments, a number of complicating reasons, in addition to the usual situation: jealousy, the extremely difficult character of the husband, frequent beatings, etc. It is interesting that the corral, which gives the right to divorce , existed for a long time, but the very act of divorce and the attitude of the environment towards a divorced woman would rather lead her to suicide than to try to divorce. In those cases when a woman nevertheless sought a divorce, no one usually took her as a wife, and the question of returning her to her parents' family fell away by itself, as an unheard of and impossible thing. A divorced woman became a scum of society. She had no choice but to drag out the existence of a farm laborer, selling her labor to the kulak for bread. Such cases are not uncommon in Bashkir life, and the fact of hiring her with a fist, no matter how he treats her, is regarded as a blessing. Getting into such a situation, a woman truly "drank a bitter cup to the bottom." As the servant of a wealthy peasant, his wives and his entire family, she was the subject of constant bullying and oppression; there could be no question of human conversion, even less of protest. This was the price for the lives of those who could not or did not want to die, but now a young Bashkir woman becomes a mother. The name is the grandmother who "helps" the childbirth, that is, ties her tightly and begins to knead her stomach. They look at a woman almost as an instrument of production — her business is to bring a child, preferably a male, to her husband and owner, and therefore the custom, tyrannizing her as a man, protects her like a woman in labor. But as soon as the child grows up, she loses the right to him, especially if he is a boy. His first steps are not directed by his mother. In his free time, his father, playing with him, inspires jokes. he has contempt for the woman — for the mother, so if the baby hits her or simply shows disdain, he laughs, kind and proud of his son. Soon the boy passes into the hands of the mullah. Despite this situation, all the care for him, at least until the age of 8, lies with the mother; until the age of five she follows him, like any mother, then she begins to serve him. She is hopelessly attached to the child; if he gets sick, or dies, she must answer to her husband and can answer cruelly. It's another matter if the child is a girl. In this case, the mother is given complete freedom of action, as long as it is not to the detriment of her time, and, therefore, work. (As a rule, a woman has to work all day, from morning to evening). During the day, she certainly has no time, but the night is at her disposal. She bathes the child, talks to him and humbly prepares him for her slave lot. There are, of course, deviations for the better or for the worse. If the husband is young, too poor and the wife he has taken from him is the first — her life is much easier. But if he is an elderly man and has several wives, the young wife should look after them and please them with work and submission. Deviations for the better are in direct proportion to the material condition of the husband; Thus, a rich Bashkir has the opportunity to support an employee, sometimes even several, which, of course, partly relieves his wife from black work, allows her to use the time at her own discretion (unfortunately, such an improvement has harmful roots in class exploitation and in the well-being of the economically stronger element at the expense of the weakest). Yet in some respects, a Bashkir woman feels freer after marriage; she is allowed to walk everywhere with an open face (only from the father-in-law is supposed to always close); she can talk to a man and even walk down the street with him. Only crossing the road and overtaking at a meeting is impossible."If a woman even bears a weight and she needs to cross the road along which a man is walking, no matter how far he goes, she must let him go ahead." Otherwise, her life is not much different from the previous one and, in the end, largely depends on the nature and natural properties of her husband. As before, everything around her is aimed at once again reminding her of her insignificance. As before, when her husband has guests, she serves them, and after seeing off the guests, she retires to her “female world”, the world of livestock and children's crying. She is not allowed into the mosque, as it is considered unclean, nor even in the cemetery, which is venerated on a par with the mosque. There is no need to even talk about any participation in public life — at gatherings, meetings. The general oppression of the Bashkir woman was further strengthened by a number of economic and legal restrictions, laws on inheritance and land allotments, according to which she not only did not enjoy equal rights with a man, but most often was not taken into account at all as a legally capable family member. Only one day a year belongs to her. In the beginning of spring, a "cargo-tui", a specially women's holiday, is held annually. In addition to women, a boy "7TSG" TZ years; there are no men And and there is no oppression and usual oppression. All the women leave the village in the morning, taking some food with them, and stay in the field for the whole day. At first, everyone is frightened by the unusual freedom and workers do not know what to do with themselves. Revival does not come immediately to this | the only day of the spring amnesty; at first, only boys frolic, and girls and women look at them lying on the grass. Then they rise one by one, joining the children. A game of burners begins, a race for distillation. Many people tuck their shirts into their pants to make running easier. The old women cook their food in large cauldrons specially brought for this purpose. All faces are open and, perhaps, for the only time a year, they are truly joyful. (So ​​until the evening. With the sunset the procession of the carriage - \\ revolves into the village. The mosque rises on the edge of the azanchis calling the believers from the minaret. The women walk quieter. Men come across and joke with them. They lower their eyes, excitement Let us note some more features of the position of the Bashkir woman in the family, and above all, polygamy, which is somewhat widespread in Bashkiria, although in most cases it is the privilege of the kulak group of the population. It is not uncommon for the younger wife to be younger than the children of other wives. degree, survivals of the old custom, according to which, after the death of her husband, a widow marries his younger brother or nephew. The reasons for this custom are purely economic (the ability not to pay the kalym, as well as some difficulty in the family system and strict exogamy of getting a wife on the side) At present, together with the generic structure, it has lost its coercive character. In poor families, it is more common, in rich less often. th culture and serfdom view of women did their job. It is difficult to imagine a more complete hopelessness than that of the pre-revolutionary Bashkir woman. It was unthinkable even for individual strong individualities of the female environment to get out of bondage. Now, this colonial psychology, which has long become a terrible past for us, is collapsing and the former "foreigners of great Russia" have become full-fledged peoples of the Autonomous Republics. And only now the Bashkir woman, in the ranks of her compatriots, is slowly entering the great path of emancipation.
III. Soviet Bashkiria.
After the brutal reprisal of the insurrectionary movement by tsarist Russia, any noticeable social movement in Bashkiria began only in 1905, when the Bashkir workers took part in strikes. The extreme backwardness of the masses, the insignificance of the proletariat, the aggravation of national and economic relations, the barely outlined stratification of the countryside! —All this could not become the basis for social protest. The agrarian movement in 1905 did not go beyond the felling of forests, waste and refusal of rent, and in some places the seizure of land. The Stolypin planting of the kulaks and the imperialist war, ruining the poor, accelerated the stratification, and nevertheless it was so insignificant that even in 1917 mullahs, village elders and kulaks led almost all political actions. The October Revolution did not immediately bring liberation to the Bashkir people. November 1917 in Bashkiria were the Cossack troops of the general. Dutova (Dutov is a general who played a prominent role in the history of the White Guard adventure in the Urals! And in Siberia). The Kurlatai convened under him formed a government called! The Central Bashkir National Council, which in essence was completely inactive, torn apart by an internal struggle between its opposing elements — bourgeois nationalists, on the one hand, and the poor and revolutionary front-line soldiers — on the other. Meanwhile; in Bashkiria itself, a civil war began. Then, to fight the ever-growing revolutionary movement, bourgeois nationalists proclaim the slogan: "Bashkiria for the Bashkirs", hoping to play in this way on the national feelings of the masses. Kulaks and rich mountain Bashkirs are associated: with the Cossacks and part of the government with Zaki Validov at the head enters into an agreement 'with Dutyu'i: and the Committee of the Constituent Assembly. Com. uch. recognizes an independent Bashkir government and an independent Bashkir army! and "(Validists" start organizing voluntary detachments. However, after the seizure of power by Kolchak, the White Guard policy causes a sharp aggravation of relations between the Bashkirs and the Cossacks. The Bashkir government leaves Orenburg, and in the end Kolchak abolishes the autonomy of Bashkiria and orders the Bashkir troops to obey Dutov. But Orenburg was taken by the Red Army in January 1919. The Bashkir government goes over to the side of Soviet power, the Bashkir detachments open joint actions with the Red Army, and already on March 22, 1919, the All-Russian Central Executive Committee issues a decree On the formation of an autonomous Bashkir SSR. going over to the side of Soviet power, the "Validians" under the guise of narrowly nationalist and religious slogans are trying to stop the revolutionary movement, first by sabotage, and then by open uprisings and guerrilla war. The originality of national and economic relations in the country (neighborhood with the Cossacks, Russian kulaks) and a large number of trained local workers made possible distortions and misinterpretations in attitudes towards the national policy of the sovlast (which, due to the food crisis, exacerbated and prolonged the civil war). Clarification of the basic principles of national and economic policy of the government gradually isolated the kulak groups from the broad masses and the anti-Soviet movement degenerated into banditry, which was finally liquidated by 1922. Only from that time did Bashkiria enter a period of peaceful construction. At present, the Autonomous Bashkir Republic consists of 8 cantons (the canton, approximately, corresponds to the district) - Argayashsky, Belebeyevsky, Birskopo, Zilairovsky, Mesyagutovsky, Sterlitamaksky, Tamyan-Kataysky and Ufa. Volosts in the republic 117. The center is the city of Ufa (84.272 inhabitants). Needless to say, the dominance of the White Guard chieftains, civil war, hunger and banditry; in the end they undermined the already disorganized economy of the country. The union government came to the aid of the impoverished country, supporting its budget with subsidies and striving to improve its economy. The main place in the economy of the ABSSR is occupied by agriculture, which gives 80% of the total production of the country. But the sown area during the years of the revolution has decreased by almost 3 slaves, and only now has it expanded again to its former size. In 1925 it was equal to 2 million dessiatines, which amounted to 76 dessiatines per 100 people. Cultivated, mainly, rye, wheat, oats, millet — their sown area occupies 80% of the total field crop. L General and industrial crops account for only 3%; potatoes, common only in certain parts of the country, are beginning to gain recognition, and their sowing has already reached 4%. There are almost no sowing grasses, since natural used hayfields are P / 8 million dess. With a normal harvest, the production of grain crops gives 43.3 poods per capita. The sown area is growing steadily and is already reaching the pre-war level. The first measure of the Soviet government in the field of agriculture was the equalization of land use, both class and national. Then, in addition to the usual benefits for the poorest farms, increased attention was paid to agro-assistance to the population (at present there are 53 agricultural stations in the ABSSR) and to planned machine-building, since the provision of agriculture with implements is extremely low (until 1930. it is supposed to deliver over 2 thousand tractors). Cattle breeding is the second most important sector of the national economy. In the southeast, it still retains a predominant role in agriculture. Horse breeding, which has been reduced by three times, is recovering more difficult than other branches of cattle breeding, already equal to the pre-revolutionary level. In figures, cattle breeding is expressed as follows (in thousands of heads): horses — 662.9; cattle — 1.313; small ruminants — 2.275.7; pigs - 480.6 (1925); per 100 households - 138.8 horses, 277 head of cattle, 476.6 small, 100.6 pigs. Beekeeping, widespread, with the bead-feeding method, has sharply decreased, and currently it employs 9.7% 'farms. But on the other hand, in these farms, it is not one of the subsidiary trades: but is moving to the first place, switching to the beekeeping system. Gardening is very little developed and fully serves the population of the regions occupied by it only due to the habit of the Bashkir population to vegetables as a food product. However, during the years of the revolution, with a sharp reduction in field sowing, it became more widespread. Forests make up% of the territory and give 19 thousand cubic meters. soot. annual growth of wood at a consumption of 1Z1 / 2 thousand cubic meters. soot. The forest inventory carried out by the government helps forestry to take a large place in the country's economy, but the main attention was paid to the cooperation of the population, since only on this path is the technical progress of villages possible, - households. That the line was drawn correctly is best confirmed by the figures: so on January 1. 1924 in the village. cooperation was * only 2 ° / o farms, on October 1. 1924-8 ° / 0, and on October 1. 1925 - already 20%. Therefore, they are created! and artels io different branches of the economy - so there are 43 butter-making cooperatives with 2399 members, 10 poultry farms with 943 members, 50 beekeepers with 2450 members. Handicrafts are developed most of all in the eastern mountain-forest cantons, where, naturally, woodworking predominates and bast. But cooperation among handicraftsmen is very weak, and only in 1926 a special trade union was formed for the comprehensive organization of handicrafts. The industry of the ABSSR was insignificant and was in its infancy. The number of workers in the eligible industry in 1925-26 barely reached 18,000. The total cost of production in the same year is 41% million rubles. In the first place are metallurgical and distilleries. Nevertheless, the prospects for its development are great, since the ABSSR is rich in minerals, especially iron and gold-copper ores. At present, a course has been taken to revitalize local industry, which will not only raise the country's productive forces, but also create cadres of the industrial proletariat, of which about 1/3 are currently Bashkirs and Tatars. In 2 (recent years, trade has grown in 41/2 times, and the state budget has doubled. In the field of socio-political relations, a sharp change in the Tsosle-October period is provided primarily by the cause of public education. It would be appropriate to cite the following figures: in 1925 the government was spent on the needs of public education 1 p. 40 kopecks,for health care - 49 kopecks, while the administrative costs were only 83 kopecks. Currently, the ABSSR has 1 workers' faculty, 1 institute of public education, 16 technical schools, 10 factory-head. uch-sch and special schools of advanced type. There are 3,700 students in them, of which 17.7 / o Bashkirs and 28.8 / o Tatars. Schools I stage 2.146, II stage - 64 and 14 special, Bashkir schools, 7 preschool houses with a total number of students 156 thousand. In 1924-25 there were 365 schools and educational programs with 42 thousand students, in 1925-26 - 767 schools and centers. Here Bashkirs make up 14о / о, Tatars 36% of students. Half of all reading rooms are Tatar-Bashkir. In addition, out of 6 local newspapers, 2 are published in Bashkir and 2 in Tatar. There is a "Bashkir Scientific Society" in Ufa, which publishes 2 journals. The publishing house "Bashkniga" was opened there since 1922, and at the same time the Bashkir section of the "Central Publishing House of the Peoples of the USSR" operates in Moscow. The reform of the old Arabic alphabet, which did not correspond to the spirit of the Bashkir language, was carried out, Bashkir literature began to be created and, finally, a mobile Bashkir drama troupe was working. Trade unions in the ABSSR numbered 59 thousand people in 1925, of which 50% were workers. 50% of employees. Bashkirs make up 10%, Tatars 13%. As of June 1, 1926, the Bashkir Communist Party consisted of 11 thousand members, of which 15.3% are Bashkirs and 21.7% are Tatars. Bashkirs make up 23% of the Komsomol, Tatars 25.5%. The growth of the party is very great — in the year since 1925 it grew by 53%. The conclusion from all that has been said is that the growth of Bashkir national culture is taking place in all areas. Young Soviet Bashkiria builds councils, learns, creates culture, raises the country's productivity.

IV. Bashkir after the revolution.
Soviet legislation equated women in rights with men. From what has been said in the second part, it is clear how important this was for a Bashkir woman in matters of inheritance, land use, not to mention her marital and social status. But the low socio-economic and cultural level and. the inertia of the masses most of all affects the position of women in the family. Therefore, no matter how great the striving of the Bashkir woman for freedom and knowledge, her emancipation was the most difficult work. We will not repeat everything that has already been said about the general situation of the country at the time of the formation of the ABSSR. We will only add that the absence of a well-functioning apparatus and auxiliary means of work had the most pronounced effect precisely in the work on the female line — the promoted Bashkir women, striving for social work, had neither experience nor knowledge, and the apparatus of the women's department had almost no workers familiar with. local conditions. The so-called "native bias" —t. That is, the latent bourgeois-national chauvinism, which at first impeded Soviet work in Bashkiria, could not help but oppose the women's movement as well. The emancipation of women was interpreted as an undermining of national traditions, as national oppression. Therefore, at first, the work of the instructors of the Obzhenotdel, with the assistance of the first women-social activists, is naturally grouped around large centers. Then it spreads throughout the country, and gradually covers the most distant cantons. As it moves inland, work among women expands and becomes stronger every day. Around the singles, shots of active women grow up, and the following figures are the best confirmation of this. The entire apparatus of the women's department by the end of 1926 consists of 96 people, including 76 volunteers. Thus, of the 117 volosts of the republic, 65 ° / o has already been covered by planned work. The delegate composition is steadily growing from year to year, as the following figures show: 1824-25 ... 7,434 delegations. Of these, 2,934 Tat.-Bashk. 1925-26 "... 9,509" "4.978" "1926- 27 "... 12.030" "9.137" "In them, attention is drawn not so much to the overall growth of the delegate corps, but to the increase in the proportion of Bashkir and Tatar women in the total mass of delegates: in 1924-25 only 39%, in 1925 - 26 - 52%, and in 1926-1926-27 - 76%. The delegate corps of the women's department, as you know, is the main form of constant communication between the apparatus and the masses, its role is enormous, and therefore the given percentages best show that, despite the usual submissiveness of the female masses, there could be no subconscious protest in them. And not surprising; after all, until now the Bashkir woman was a slave, a thing of her master, a man, almost an object of trade. Therefore, a stubborn struggle ensues around the women's movement, in which the growing female self-awareness is opposed not only by old family covenants, but also by the skillfully used authority of the church x) Muslim clergy! and the kulaks are almost entirely religious, at least formally, they are united by the "Spiritual Administration of Muslims of Russia and Siberia" (as they call themselves), which does everything possible to preserve its influence over the most backward strata of the population and keep women on the "righteous path ”, Within the framework of the pre-revolutionary life, and it must be admitted that it has its adherents. Therefore, it is the mullahs who organize around themselves opposition to the women's movement. They turn the inertness or indifference of the masses into an active force, the unwillingness of a man to give up his rights into a protest against the "female dominance", the passivity of a woman who has not yet realized that her old dreams are coming true into a national and religious ideal of mother and wife, and the inevitable even an enlightened Bashkir woman's shyness before a new path — into frightened * humiliation. The clergy are blocked with kulak elements and are trying to oppose their work to the Soviet public. ^ Of course, it would be ridiculous to talk about serious opposition and see danger here; it is clear that the elimination of the "righteous ways" is only a matter of time. Nevertheless, in some places the influence of the mullah is still strong, and the rule of the “old”, “good” Sharia is raging over the woman. This work is developing especially energetically during the pre-election campaign. In order to prevent a woman from participating in public work, the mullahs seek to discredit her candidacy, not abandoning the lowest methods of struggle, up to defaming the candidate's personality with slanderous fabrications. Along with this, the Muslim clergy, adapting to new conditions, extremely changes and reform the former elementary forms of religious agitation; for example, they allow women to enter mosques, organize at the latter some kind of craft courses, circles, and, finally, even provide some material support in the form of religious charity. The wives of the mullahs act independently. Their agitation is extremely strong, as they are well aware of the weaknesses of each woman, her relationship with her family and neighbors. They buy the trust of the dark Bashkir with gifts and attention to her, to her children, often even substantial help in order to later undermine the authority of the Soviet school in cautious bareness and convince the mother of the advantage of the mekteb.In other cases, acting through their husbands, they call out to their national pride, to male authority, indignant against the unheard of "female dominance and licentiousness." There are frequent cases / when a husband, converted by wise agitation, began by returning home, beating his wife half to death, defending his “sacred” rights from “Soviet encroachments”. Accordingly, the work of the women's department is strongly individualized - in addition to leading the movement and the general struggle against the inertia of the masses, also the protection in each individual case of a certain person, whether through moral support or influence on others, or, finally, in especially aggravated clashes (beating by her husband, etc.) - by attracting the attention of the judiciary. To assist in this work, there are legal consultations for women — one for each canton and two for the mountains. Ufa. In general, this work requires a lot of patience, caution and perseverance in order to avoid aggravation in the most backward corners. If it is still true that in some cases a woman, due to her darkness and humiliation, continues to be a slave and voluntarily tolerates her subordinate position, then women who realized their slavery and unlawful arbitrariness over oneself and nevertheless forced to endure them — certainly not.She knows where to look for protection, and therefore it is not so rare when she initiates proceedings against her husband, divorces him or 'achieves an independent position in her own family, demanding the division of property. Having won home independence, the Bashkir woman, step by step, is winning back her participation in the construction of our Soviet reality. We can state that the influence of everyday traditions is still very strong. ' Nevertheless, the woman's desire for activity is growing; it is reflected in the following figures: in 1927 - 3,412 women Bashkir pioneers were elected members of the village councils, 190 - members of the VIK'ov, 24 - KIK'ov, 142 - city councils. Finally, 12 work as chairpersons of village councils. It is enough to recall the recent past in order to understand what a huge shift in the consciousness of the masses was required to realize such a fact as the promotion of a woman to responsible leadership work in her own village, in front of her relatives and friends. The Komsomol, which currently unites more than 2,000 Bashkir Tatar girls, plays a huge role in the upbringing of a Bashkir woman. Its influence as a public organization is colossal. The woman penetrates into all branches of work — in 1926, in the Bashkir courts, 3.082 women of narzas, s. The delegates instruct 322 reading rooms and conduct cultural and educational work in them. In the shop commissions of the Central Regional Committee, women make up 52%. Here it will be appropriate to note the following characteristic fact in cooperative work - meetings of shareholders, meetings of commissioners, shop commissions and cooperation assistance cells give almost 100% of attendance for Bashkir women. Members of educational unions are no longer only adult women, but also adolescents and their percentage of all Gradually, new cadres of female workers are being created — 25% of the students in the Soviet Communist Party schools and volunteer courses are women. In May 1927, a special commission of the Central Committee of the Women's Department "to improve the working and living conditions of women" began work in Bashkiria. The main tasks of the commission are the settlement of issues of women's education, the cooperation of women, the fight against everyday conservatism, the protection of mothers and children, and so on. As we can see, the main purpose of the commission is to facilitate the work of the local women's department. Despite the relatively short period of its existence, 'thanks to the attention and support of the' Bashkir government, the commission was able to expand its work widely, linking it with the work of the women's department. The commission focused its main attention on improving the financial situation of women. For the final liberation of a woman from the yoke of old traditions, there is little development of the community, and little growing self-awareness. Her economic dependence on her husband, on her family, her personal insecurity and the difficulty of finding an independent income — all this deprives a woman of the opportunity to boldly go her own way in cases of conflicts and clashes with her family and the village. Therefore, the cooperation of the female masses and the collectivization of female labor in Bashkiria is of exceptional importance, and here the beginning of the liberation of women from material dependence is laid, not to mention the constant accustoming to the public, to collective work. Cooperation was developing most satisfactorily along the lines of the Oil Union. The Oil Union organized 4 women's artels and purchased 12 libraries for the study of dairy business for a number of circles and agricultural artels. Limited funds and everyday conservatism did not allow the female masses to be widely drawn into cooperation. Nevertheless, the commission has already created 14 poultry associations, of which 4 are composed exclusively of women. Thanks to the insistence of the same commission, NKZem purchased about 400 breeding poultry "for those of the newly organized associations that will involve women in their work." Funds allotted by Kustpromsoyuz were used to purchase machinery and raw materials for four women's artels — two sewing ones, which will employ about 60 women in general, one linen shop in Ufa, and a larger knitwear cooperative in Belebey. Since the lack of knowledge of crafts by the Bashkirs hinders the development of women's labor, the organization and equipment by the commission of the House of the Working Woman of Bashkiria named after Clara Zetkin is of great importance. The house has a dormitory for 20 people, 10 for women and 10 for preschool children. В правила дома входит обязательная ликвидация неграмотности каждой женщины из переменного состава обитательниц дома и попутное обучение какому-нибудь ремеслу. Для облегчения женского домашнего труда в программу сельскохозяйственных школ и техникумов включены вопросы домоводства и в штате НКЗем’а выделен инструктор по домоводству. Этому же содействуют и детские площадки, для детей дошкольного возраста (их 52), так как они, хотя и частично, разгружают женщин от семейных забот.На 1928 г. комиссией предусмотрена организация ряда краткосрочных курсов по молочному делу, птицеводству и козоводству. По линии Нар-компроса намечено устройство женского клуба в одном из кантонов с преобладающим башкирским населением. В г. Темясове приступлено в настоящее время к организации учебно-показательной мастерской по вязанию пуховых платков в среднем на 25-30 чел. По утверждениям местного Куст-промсоюза этой отрасли кустарной промышленности в Башкирии принадлежит большое будущее, вследствие чего комиссией возбуждено ходатайство перед ВСНХ об открытии еще двух учебно-показательных мастерских того же типа на 100 человек.Конечно, всего этого далеко недостаточно—ни количества отраслей и школ, ни размера их. Ограниченность средств, незнание башкирских женщинами самостоятельных и прибыльных ремесел, не дают возможности быстро расширять сеть артелей и кооперативов, облегчающих женщине переход от первичной социальной ячейки-семьи— к более высоким общественным формам.Башкирская республика молода, за ней стоит фактически каких-нибудь 5—6 лет планомерной работы в спокойных условиях, и для этого срока достигнутые результаты огромны. Только благодаря исключитетельной энергии руководства и революционному под’ему масс, проявленному всеми народами Советского Востока, удалось создать ту силу, которую он теперь собой представляет. Советская культура для народов востока является первой, которая, не насилуя национальных особенностей, создавая все возможности для развития национальной культуры, одновременно приобщает их ко всему цивилизованному миру; для женщины—это первая культура, которая открывает широкое поле ее самодеятельности. Впервые башкирская женщина находит отклик своим запросам и стремлениям, защиту своих человеческих прав, и сама может строить свою жизнь. Отсюда понятны становятся ее горячность и жадность к участию в жизни республики, о чем так красноречиво говорят цифры.