1. China national revolutionary movement
China, covering an area of ​​11 thousand square meters. klm., with its colossal population of 440 million people and its wealth, for a long time attracted the attention of the European states of the sailors of Europe in the XVI century. aspired to penetrate into this fabulous country, about which they walked the same way as about India, tempting and fantastic legends dedicated to its innumerable treasures. In this and later eras, silk and tea were the main commodities of trade between China and Europe, while traces of a high and very ancient culture have been preserved in China. But the Chinese vigilantly protected themselves from the penetration of foreigners, and everything that was done behind the Great Wall of China remained unknown to Europeans. However, in the middle of the last century, the development of capitalist machine production in European countries, which presented more and more broad demands in the field of markets and raw materials, became an incentive for an increase in the activity of European states in their penetration into China. China with its huge population was a very tasty morsel as a sales market for industrial products of capitalist countries; the possibility of the development of industrial crops' and the extraction of minerals made it attractive as a reservoir of raw materials needed by this same industry. Industrial crops include: tea cultivated in the regions of South and Central China (the annual export of Chinese tea now amounts to about 80 million rubles), silkworm growing, also developed in these regions and on the Shandong Peninsula, cotton growing, mainly in the basin of the river. Yang Tzu; in cotton production, China ranks third in the world, after the United States and India. Of the minerals, one must name: iron, coal, copper, antimony, mercury, precious metals, etc. Finally, China is extremely important as an object for the import of foreign capital invested in transport, banks, industry, etc. Since the first half of the last century, the imperialist powers have been striving to assert their political influence in China, which could provide them with economic benefits. England was the first power to achieve significant privileges in China; The Nanking Treaty, which marked the beginning of English rule in China, was the first in the chain of the so-called. Unequal treaties that still weigh heavily on the body of the Chinese people. Following this, an increase in activity on the part of France in the area bordering on her possessions in Indo-China and Germany, which "leased" territory on the Shandung Peninsula, is noticed. Finally, the first years of this century were marked by an aggravation of rivalry between Japan and tsarist Russia due to the predominance in Northern and Southern Manchuria, which resulted in the war of 1904, which ended, as you know, with the defeat of Russia and the consolidation of Japanese influence in northern China. In the era preceding the world war of 1914-18. British and Japanese diplomacy in China acted in contact, and in the Russo-Japanese war, Japan relied on British support. Later, the United States penetrated here. Seeing that the best positions have already been taken here, American diplomacy puts forward the so-called. "The principle of open doors", that is, seeks to provide American capital with conditions equal to those of other powers. The late American imperialism acts very cautiously at first, using soft methods of penetration, as opposed to the brutal violence and arbitrariness of the British and Japanese. This explains the sympathy of the Chinese intelligentsia for America, sympathy that is now evaporating, for American imperialism is no longer playing at complacency and meekness. The imperialist powers, despite mutual contradictions, acted as a united front in those cases when it was necessary to achieve new privileges for foreigners and new restrictions on China's independence. The basis of foreign rule in China is a system of unequal treaties, which provides foreign capital with enormous advantages over the native one. Thanks to "unequal treaties" they received the right to set up in ports open for foreign trade, isolated foreign quarters (settlements), control over Chinese customs, the proceeds from which went to pay foreign loans, the right of consular jurisdiction, that is, jurisdiction of foreign subjects to consular courts, and not to Chinese courts, etc. Thus, the foreigners became the actual masters of China, imperiously dictating their will to it under the reliable cover of gunboats and airborne troops. Under these favorable conditions, foreign capital was pouring into China, which was covered with a dense network of British, Japanese, American, and other industrial enterprises. Foreign goods, taking advantage of their privileged position, flooded the country, delaying the development of local industry. By the beginning of this century, China was an economically and (technically backward agricultural country, dominated by feudal relations and I. Even today, the vast majority of the population is engaged in agriculture, and about 75% of the entire peasantry has little land and in the majority is forced to rent land from large landowners (constituting only 11% of the agricultural population, and the dominant form of rent is rent in kind. into many economically completely isolated regions, China was the arena of permanent struggle between individual governor-generals (dujuns). The peasantry, burdened with exorbitant taxes and high rents, being in a completely powerless state, forced to sell their products to foreign merchants at low prices, followed the path To this must be added the incredible arbitrariness and bribery of officials who were (uncontrolled and autocratic masters in their districts. On the throne of the Chinese Empire was the Manchurian dynasty, descended from the Manchur tribe, who once conquered China, based on the reactionary bureaucracy and the military. All these conditions paved the way for fermentation and discontent among the broad masses, especially the peasantry, which initially turned into a spontaneous form of riots and the formation of bandit gangs. The introduction of foreign capital into China was accompanied by the destruction of feudal economic forms and the process of a certain industrialization of China. Already at the end of the last century, there was an increase in the manufacturing industry in China, mainly in textiles and silk. Later, especially in the era of World War II, the industrialization of China is making great strides. The mining industry is developing (mining of coal, ore, etc.), metallurgy, machine-building, in particular, shipbuilding, etc.). As a result of the changes that have taken place, the indigenous bourgeoisie appears on the scene, which very soon became a serious competitor to foreign capital in China. In the era of world war, Chinese capital still | more inflows into industry and is gaining a prominent place in a whole range of industries. It is quite understandable that the usual methods of imperialism and the conditions created by foreign diplomacy in China were a very serious obstacle to the development of the Chinese bourgeoisie, which naturally in the majority takes a position, hostile to foreign domination and internal Chinese reaction. At the same time, the process of China's industrialization gives rise to a large industrial Chinese proletariat, currently reaching more than 21/2 million people, quickly realizing its task of combating imperialism, which hinders the process of normal economic and social development of the country through the predatory seizure of concessions, enslavement China's loans, control over customs, etc. The incredibly difficult working conditions of the Chinese worker, which we will discuss below, make the class struggle in China especially acute. Thus, the ground is created for a united national revolutionary movement. on- ; from the local Chinese reactionary forces which were directed against world imperialism and against its agents. The first outbursts of dissatisfaction brewing among the masses were: the Taiping uprising in the middle of the last century and the boxing uprising in 1898-1901. The latter took on extremely formidable forms; its immediate reasons were: the defeat of China in the war with Japan, accompanied by a large indemnity, a number of concessions granted to tsarist Russia, etc. The government, frightened by the anti-dynastic nature of this movement, tried to divert the people's anger from itself and direct it against foreigners. The rebels moved to Beijing, where an anti-foreign movement also broke out and the foreman of the diplomatic corps, the German ambassador, was killed in the street by a devastated crowd. The united forces of all the capitalist powers Soon defeated the rebels, took Beijing and, of course, crowned their success with a bloody massacre, very characteristic of the constant tactics carried out in China, by "enlightened seafarers." The result of this expedition was the famous protocol of 1901, which significantly expanded the privileges of foreigners in China, introduced the extraterritoriality (extra-land) of the embassy quarter and finally consolidated foreign domination in the country. The next stage of the Chinese liberation movement dates back to 1910-11. This movement was more organized and wider than previous outbreaks, reflecting the pressing demands of the majority of the nation. The growing bourgeoisie, the peasantry, and the Chinese intelligentsia united in their hatred of foreign rule and the Manchu monarchy. The movement began with a campaign to buy the railways from foreigners, which are a powerful weapon of imperialism, and resulted in an uprising that engulfed the most important regions of Central China. Revolutionary propaganda met with warm sympathy not only among the broad masses within the country, but also among the numerous Chinese emigrants in other countries, in particular in the United States. Under the onslaught of this revolution, the centuries-old Manchurian a monarchy so hated by the Chinese masses, and China was declared a republic. The movement was led by Dr. Sun-Yat-Sen (Sun-Wen), who was initially elected as the interim president of the republic. Sun-Yat-Sen, whose name is now widely known far beyond the borders of China, along with the great leaders of the struggle for the liberation of the oppressed all over the world, and the Kuomintang party organized by him, for the first time embodied that spontaneous discontent in orderly concrete forms. that roamed the Chinese masses. Having won the sympathy of the petty bourgeoisie, the peasantry and the proletariat, the Sun Yat Sen party became the most significant force of Chinese nationalism, its militant organization in the struggle against imperialism and internal reaction. The 1911 revolution broke the monarchy, but it did not recover from the task of radical restructuring of the entire state organism. The previous bureaucratic reactionary apparatus remained in place and did its job, undermining the foundations of the new order. Sun-Yat-Sen, under pressure from rallied reactionary forces directed by foreign diplomacy, was forced to give way to the interim president to the old courtier of the Manchurians, Yuan Shi-kai, who, on the one hand, resumed contact with foreigners, continuing the sale of wealth | countries wholesale and retail, on the other hand, with the help of reactionary women, he pursued a policy of brutal repression against representatives of liberal and revolutionary thought, nullifying all the gains of the revolution. The subsequent era of Chinese history is characterized by the permanent struggle of individual militaristic cliques led by dudzuns and dubani (general-governors and governors) of individual regions, striving to achieve domination over the entire country. This struggle is exploited to their advantage by various foreign powers, in their interests to prevent the creation of a 'united national' state.In the era of the world war, the reactionary Chinese government, hoping for the generosity of the Entente powers in case of their victory, in 1917 joined them. declaring war on the central powers. These hopes, of course, did not come true, and the areas on the Shandong Peninsula taken from Germany passed to the Japanese, instead of returning to their rightful owner. The post-war era in China is characterized by an increase in the activity of the imperialist powers. The main roles are played by: England, which after 1921 changed Japan in favor of an alliance with America, Japan and the United States; these three states account for about 90% of all China's foreign trade (42% to England, 31% to Japan, 16o / o — the United States). Japan's interests are concentrated mainly in the north: in Manchuria and Shandong, as well as in Shanghai, British interests in the southern ports of the industrial region of Central China, American interests in the same ports, mainly in Shanghai. Each of these powers uses some Chinese general! as his agent, supporting him with money and weapons in order to achieve a strengthening of his influence in China. Japan relied on the Mukden satrap, Zhang-Tso-Lin, England, and America acted mainly through their protege, General. U Pei-fu, based in the valley of the river. Yangtze, sometimes not neglecting the alliance with Zhang-Tseo-Lin. Finally, a revolutionary, nationalist government was established in Canton, headed by Sun-Yat-Sen and the Kuomintang Party. The struggle between these groups in the era of the post-World War II was with varying success. The reactionary militarists strove to extend their power to the whole of China, from which, of course, the foreign powers supporting them benefited in the first place. In 1922, U-Pei-Fu, as a result of his victory over Chang-Tso-Ling, became the dictator of Central China, achieved decisive influence in Beijing and began to prepare the final destruction of his main rivals: Chang-Tso-Ling and the revolutionary government of South China. However, in 1924, as a result of a bloc of forces hostile to him and a sudden speech by General. Fyn-Yu-Hsiang, who staged a coup in Beijing, U-Pei-Fu suffers a great defeat. Fyn-Yu-Xiang, who has gained influence in Beijing and Central China, is increasingly drawing closer to the nationalist movement. Under the influence of this new danger, the former enemies, Chang-Tso-Lin and U-Pei-Fu, converge and develop an offensive against the People's Army organized by Fyn-Yu-Hsiang. In the summer of 1926, the People's Army was pushed back to the northwest outskirts of China, and a new reactionary government was formed in Beijing, consisting of the appointees of both militarists. At the same time, a third force, the Kuomintang party, was growing and gaining strength in southern China in the province of Guangdong which created in one of the most important ports of China Canton - a citadel of the national liberation struggle for the unification of China against imperialism. In 1925, the Chinese revolution suffered a heavy loss. The leader and organizer of the Kuomintang Sun-Yat-Sen died. However, despite this, the growth of the party's influence and its successes went ahead. Having secured its positions in Guan-Tung, the Cantonese government began to form a strong army to organize a campaign to the North. Political education of soldiers and The formation of reliable military and political commanders in the so-called Wampu school largely predetermined the successful outcome of the southern enterprise. The work of the Cantonese government proceeded in incredibly difficult conditions. The revolutionary Canton was a thorn in the eye of England, especially because of the proximity to English Hong Kong. Hong Kong, concessioned to England in 1842, became a stronghold of British trade in southern China, and therefore England continually obstructs the development of its rival port of Canton. In order to crush this "hotbed of revolution", England sets against Canton the northern generals and the militaristic groups of the neighboring provinces (Guang Xi and Yun Nan); without limiting itself to this, it is trying to inflame confusion in Canton itself, using for this the layers of the Cantonese bourgeoisie, economically connected with British capital. In 1924, these elements, organized into the corps of the so-called "paper tigers", raised an uprising, but were defeated due to the strictness of the Vakshu school. All of England's efforts to break Canton were unsuccessful. The canton continued to grow stronger, attracting the sympathy of the broad masses of the rest of China. Finally, in the fall of 1926, the Canton army embarked on a decisive campaign to the north, and in a short time, having defeated U-Pei-Fu, occupied the heart of the country, the industrial regions of Central China, transferred the capital of the national government to Hankou and, finally, in March 1927. enters Shanghai, where the insurgent workers seized power by expelling the reactionary army of the Shandong general Chang-Tsung-Chang. Under the influence of these colossal successes of the revolutionary troops, all the reactionary Chinese generals are united, organizing a united front against the southerners. England, the most active of all the imperialist powers, in turn is actively organizing a united front of all powers and begins an intensified transfer of troops to Shanghai, preparing the intervention. We have already spoken of those social groups on which the national revolutionary movement was based. However, in the process of recent years there has been a certain differentiation between them, influencing the further prospects of the Chinese revolution. In connection with the aggravation of the class struggle, the Chinese proletariat, which has shown extraordinary steadfastness and fighting efficiency in recent years, is coming to the fore. The Shanghai and Hong Kong strikes directed against the imperialists, the growth of the trade union movement embracing ever wider circles of workers and women workers, and the role of workers' organizations in the offensive of the national army are striking proof of the leading importance that the Chinese proletariat is acquiring in the revolutionary struggle. The allies of the proletariat are: the petty bourgeoisie, which suffers the most from the yoke of foreign capital, the petty-bourgeois intelligentsia and students, artisans, numbering in their ranks up to 7 million people, and, finally, the multimillion-dollar masses of the peasantry, exploited by the kulaks, usurers and foreign capital, who begin to sway little by little. On the contrary, the big bourgeoisie and a group of trade intermediaries (compradors), closely connected with foreign capital, fearing the growing activity of the working class, seek to come to terms with foreigners. This divergence was reflected within the Kuomintang party itself. the group of this party, representing the interests and aspirations of the working masses and small traders, continues to work together with the Chinese Communist Party and remains in fact true to the 3 basic principles of Sun Yat Sen: 1) nationalism, understood as China's national independence and its liberation from the there are no imperialists, 2) democracy, in the sense of political equality and a republican form of government, and 3) socialism, that is, radical agrarian reform and restriction of the initiative of private capital. The right trend, reflecting the interests of the big bourgeoisie, under the influence of the growth of the labor movement, increasingly departed from the previous revolutionary position, and sought a compromise with foreigners. The decisive turning point in the national revolutionary movement was the treacherous speech of the leader right-wing Kuomintang, commander-in-chief of the Canton army, gene. Chiang Kai-shek, who carried out a counter-revolutionary coup in Shanghai in April 1927 and shot a workers' demonstration. These events, coinciding with an extremely acute and tense moment of a decisive clash between the national movement and world imperialism (the bombing of Nanking, the concentration of foreign troops and ships in Chinese ports, etc.), signify the onset of a new phase in the Chinese revolution. From now on, the big bourgeoisie is turning into the camp of enemies of the revolution, which becomes the business of exclusively the Chinese working masses. The leadership of this genuine national revolutionary movement, after the betrayal of Chiang Kai-shek and his associates, is in the hands of the government of the left Kuomintang, whose capital was transferred from Canton to Wuhan 3 cities of Central China: Hankou, Wuchang and Hanyang). In Wuhanek area located in the richest region of China, the valley of the river. Yang Tzu, which is the center of Chinese heavy industry, contains the most organized and numerous cadres of the Chinese proletariat. Therefore, this area has always been the center of the revolutionary! movement and it is no coincidence that it was from here that the revolution of 1911 began, and the general became an ally of the Wuhan government. Fyn-Yu-Hsiang, who, upon his return from the USSR, again took command over the surviving part of the People's Army and launched an offensive on Beijing.

2. Woman of Old China
First of all, let us consider those aspects of the life of a Chinese woman, which are approximately the same in all social groups of the country. Such points are: the legal status of a woman, the conditions of birth, the form of marriage, etc. In the future, we will move on to consider the specific living conditions of a working Chinese woman, which distinguishes her from the life of women of the propertied classes. As in most countries of the East, in China the woman, during its centuries-old history, occupied a subordinate, half-slave position. Deprived of the right to participate in public life, the Chinese woman lived a special primitive life as a pile, in which her entire existence revolved around one center — family and household; however, even here the Chinese woman was not an independent, full-fledged mistress, but a slave to the harsh despotic discipline and tradition that reigned in the Chinese family. This powerless, subordinate position of the Chinese woman was also justified by legislation. Confucianism, this code, not so much religious dogmas as norms and prescriptions of everyday morality, won a victory over other religious teachings, Taoism and Buddhism and was officially recognized as the state religion (already in 574 AD). deity and the other world, considering them pointless and unnecessary, dealt mainly with issues of public life, and reflected the main features of the then existing Lfeudal system. It set itself the goal of educating a person and eradicating "evil inclination" in him. A number of Confucian moral precepts concerning complete obedience to the monarch, strict observance of rituals and the position of women contributed to slowing down the development of Chinese society and strengthening conservatism in the People. Characteristically, despite its purely earthly, everyday character, Confucianism abandoned faith in spirits. It was this teaching that substantiated the position in which the Chinese woman was, blocking her access to education! and participation in public life. By consolidating and canonizing the family and social relations that already existed in everyday life at that time, Confucianism created a kind of "Chinese Domostroy". On the contrary, Buddhism, widespread among the "upper classes", where women have always enjoyed some privileges, was much more merciful to a woman, almost equating her with a man; therefore, Buddhism is very popular among Chinese women, a popularity which, however, according to the testimony of many researchers, often took the form of debauchery of Buddhist priests with "pious" parishioners-] '• mi, just as it happened in the Catholic monasteries of medieval Europe, or in the Orthodox monasteries of pre-revolutionary Russia. Oppression, suffering and humiliation have entangled the life of a Chinese woman from the very moment of her birth. Each family was anxiously awaiting the birth of a son, on whom all the aspirations and hopes of the relatives were pinned. For the education of a born boy in China, they usually do not spare money, hoping that in this way he will achieve a great career and make his family happy. The daughter, these hopes in the conditions of Chinese reality, could not justify and therefore her birth was met with deep disappointment and even grief. Mourning reigned in the family, and friends and neighbors did not bring congratulations, as is usually the case at the birth of a boy, but expressed condolences. Of course, most of all this was reflected in the unhappy mother, to whom all the guilt of the unsuccessful birth was attributed. According to many versions, even the killing of newborn girls was widespread in China; these versions suggest that the often-born girl was simply taken to the yard and left here until she either died or was picked up by one of the compassionate passers-by or neighbors. However, G. Jiles, professor of Chinese at Cam Bridge and a prominent Sinologist who has lived in China for many years, refutes the existence of such a custom. Without denying that the boy is much more desirable in the family, he at the same time believes that killing daughters would be a senseless act, since, firstly, usually all young men over 18 get married and, in addition, many men have Thus, assuming the existence of the custom of killing newborn girls, one would have to admit that female fertility in China is much higher than male, which contradicts the existing data of all countries of the world. But, although the custom of killing girls is a fiction of Europeans, however, it must be admitted with certainty that in a Chinese family the birth of a girl was always undesirable. And in the future, the girl's position in the family is unenviable; they value it less, give it less worries and attention. There is an old Chinese superstition: little boys are dressed in women's clothes in order to deceive the spirits of illness or death, who, mistaking them for girls, will not take them for themselves. After a girl is 7 years old, she is usually separated from men, she cannot eat with them, even if they are her relatives brothers. The custom of bandaging the legs was extremely difficult and painful for the Chinese girl, stopping the normal growth of the leg and turning it into a shoe that was disproportionately tiny to ugliness. This custom, which arose around the 10th century AD and appeared partly as a result of the influence of men who looked at a woman as a thing and kept her locked up, protecting her from other people's encroachments, partly resulting from the peculiar sexual aesthetics of the Chinese of that time, was very widespread in (China and still not completely obsolete. However, not everyone followed it, for example, all women of the Manchu dynasty (reigning from 1644 to 1911 AD) did not resort to bandaging and had normal legs, just as they did not bandage legs of a woman of Canton, a woman of mountain tribes, etc. At present, due to the general emancipation of a Chinese woman, the custom of "golden lilies", as they call disfigured tiny legs in China, is being eradicated as harmful, humiliating, antihygienic and completely inappropriate to the economic role of a modern Chinese woman. The next stage of this bleak life is marriage. In China, marriage is a necessary stage in the life of every woman, her inevitable fate. aryh maidens "never existed in China; the only case in which a Chinese girl did not marry was when her. sold in a "tea house" (brothel). Usually, the Chinese woman did not know her future husband and the first date with him happened at the moment when she entered her new house as a wife, where she was to live her whole life. When she got married, the girl completely broke with her family, becoming a member of her husband's family; According to old Chinese laws, the transfer by a wife of products from her husband's house to her family is one of the legitimate reasons for divorce. In her new family, the newlywed immediately falls under the authority of her husband's parents, in particular her mother-in-law: thus, the character of the latter has a great influence on the entire fate of a young woman. The situation of the wife with the birth of the first child is somewhat easier, especially if it is a boy (see above). Motherhood to some extent raised the prestige of a woman, the important mission of caring for children, lying on the mother, inspired respect for her. However, nevertheless, the woman remained in a subordinate position and even in old age, according to custom, was subordinated to the will of the eldest son. Of course, under such conditions, marriage could hardly be built on genuine feelings; in those cases when, nevertheless, this love between spouses existed, according to the unwritten code of Chinese etiquette, it was considered indecent to show such love and it had to be carefully hidden. An English researcher and missionary who lived for a long time in China, John McGowan, writes about this: “Husband and wife are always very cold to each other and you will never hear a single tender word between them. One day an English girl asked a Chinese woman if she loved her husband? This question frightened the Chinese woman and she, blushing with excitement, answered: "Of course not." Only later, in an intimate conversation, she confessed this love, but what she said to a foreigner, she would never say to any of her own mother, even her own mother. " If the young woman could not instill in Herself feelings of love for her husband, then nevertheless she had to remain faithful to him all her life, since divorce on the initiative of the wife was not allowed by Chinese laws. The husband had the right to bring back his wife who had left him by force; Fornication was punished to the fullest extent of the law, on a par with treason. The husband had the right to divorce his wife if there was one of the following seven reasons: childlessness, adultery, neglect of his parents, nagging, theft (this includes the transfer by the wife to her family of products from the husband's house (see above), jealous character and leprosy. The law stipulated that the husband loses the right to divorce if: 1) if the wife properly fulfilled the period of mourning for his parents, 2) if he became rich from the time of his marriage, 3) if the wife no longer has a family, wherever the island could Polygamy, which was very developed in old China, made the position of women even more humiliating. Most men from wealthy classrooms acquired several legal concubines. In addition, it was considered quite normal for a man leaving for a long time to acquire a new wife in a new place, whom he usually left upon returning home. Of course, under such conditions, family life in most cases for a Chinese woman was a continuous oppression, turning her into a slave to her husband and his family. The only outcome for a woman, especially suffering from family tyranny, was suicide. To commit suicide meant for an oppressed woman to get rid of1 life-long penal servitude and at the same time to take revenge on her oppressors, who were to blame for her death. Despite such a bleak life, the same inexorable moral ordered a woman to express grief violently in the event of the death of her husband. The custom requires that the widow, after the death of her husband, to with the same went to the home of her relatives, where she must lead a secluded life, eat exclusively plant foods and not part with his image. In other words, the death of a husband means a burial alive for a woman. Re-marriage was extremely difficult by custom. This is the bleak lot of women in old China.

3. Chinese working woman
However, even with the existence of all this onerous order of things, the position of women of the wealthy classes or aristocracy was, of course, immeasurably better compared to the truly terrible condition in which the woman of the Chinese working masses is. A wealthy Chinese woman, when she got married, brought her husband a dowry, which to some extent mitigated her fate. Material well-being, as is usually the case, created a peaceful family environment, devoid of the acute anger that accompanies hunger and poverty. The bourgeois Chinese lady, just like her companions in Europe and America, very quickly * gets used to her position and is completely satisfied with her simple, but secure life. She is rarely interested in social life and participation in the people's liberation struggle, therefore, as we will see later, it was not this stratum that was called to lead the women's movement in China. The situation is different with the working Chinese woman. As soon as a girl in a peasant or working Chinese family reaches 8-9 years old, she must leave her relatives in order to become a source of income for them. The choice before her is twofold: either a "tea house" or a factory. Numerous colonial novels, short stories and fashionable plays often feature "charming", "graceful", etc. tea houses, which have already become a traditional attribute of Far Eastern exoticism for Europeans. Very few people imagine the full horror of these legalized and poeticized dens, in which thousands of Chinese girls, often children, driven there (by the inexorable scourge of poverty. The rapid industrialization of China after the world war led to Despite the fact that male labor in China is sold for a pittance, it does not seem to be profitable enough for foreign entrepreneurs and indigenous capitalists, and they begin widespread recruitment of women and adolescents into enterprises. crushed by the weight of taxes and extortions, suffering from landlessness, more and more ruined by the endless civil war, accompanied by robberies, requisitions and other delights, serves as a huge reservoir from which industry constantly draws this human material. The demand for female and child labor is becoming even greater reinforced by the development of the professional movement in China. Capitalists, in particular the Japanese, prefer to use the labor of women and children as an element that is less amenable to organization and therefore not dangerous. The number of women workers is especially high in the textile and silk industries, which are concentrated mainly in Shanghai. For example, Shanghai has about 600,000 workers. The relationship between the number of men, women and children employed in enterprises of different nationalities in China is characterized by the following table (see page 2E), which shows how enormously important is the role of wives in China's industry. presents a terrifying picture. Wages, as already mentioned, are here at an unparalleled low level. In Shanghai and Guangdong, wages are higher than elsewhere, but even here an adult, skilled worker earns a maximum of 20 Americans. dollars a month, women workers earn no more than 10-12 dollars a month, as for the payment of ore for children, which include girls under 16, it does not exceed 5-6 dollars. In other, smaller, industrial areas of China, wages are even lower: for adult women it does not exceed $ 8 a month, for children and adolescents 3-4 dollars. If we take into account that wages are paid on the basis of a fully worked month, and the wages for days missed due to illness or not fully worked days are deducted from it, it becomes clear what a beggarly hungry existence a Chinese worker is dragging out. For all the undemanding and unpretentiousness characteristic of the Chinese, these pitiful pennies cannot satisfy the most elementary needs, condemning the masses of children and women to slow death. Receiving such a beggarly wage, a Chinese worker is at the same time obliged to do hard labor. The working day in China is 13-14 hours; work begins! at 7 am and lasts until 7-9 pm with a break of 1 hour for meals. Children start working a little earlier than adults in order to prepare everything for work, and after the end of the working day they stay for some time to clean up workshops and other factory premises. Thus, all workers essentially spend the whole day in the factory and often stay here overnight. In appalling, unsanitary conditions during the night shift, they spend short hours of their rest in order to start the same hard day at dawn again. It is even harder for a female worker than man. In addition to earning money, she also bears the responsibility of caring for the family, children, and the entire meager, beggarly household of the Chinese working class family. Spending all day in the factory, she must leave the children to fend for themselves; therefore, she often takes them with her to the factory, where they remain until the end of the work. The worker ties the infants on their backs and continues to work in this position; older kids run around the factory, risking every minute to die under the cars, and then fall asleep right there in baskets, or on the floor, breathing in the unhealthy, dusty or steamy air of the workshops. Food, of course, is the most unsatisfactory. The food that the workers get at the right hour is usually cold, at best it is a handful of boiled rice; in addition, in most enterprises, there is no boiled water, which leads to frequent gastric diseases; In the Japanese factories in Shanghai, there is a rule that restricts workers from going to the restroom — a bullying 'that destroys the health of the worker. Besides all this, female workers have to endure a lot from male administrative staff. Flirting with female workers is extremely common and further aggravates their already difficult life. To reject the insolent harassment of the factory bosses means to be inevitably thrown out into the street, that is, face the threat of starvation. In many factories there are rules according to which female workers (unlike male workers) cannot leave of their own accord and in this case they are not given either the wages or the deposit they made upon entering the factory. Labor protection at industrial enterprises in China is extremely poorly established, as a result of which accidents with workers are very frequent. Such is the boundless exploitation of the Chinese proletariat, which includes a huge number of women and children. These working conditions are so terrible, the suffering of the Chinese workers is so conspicuous that even the British should have celebrated them. Officially published in London in 1925 in London, the book Paregs hesresip La-Loyur Cynonis wisp 1), containing the reports of the British consuls in China, gives a terrible picture of the life of Chinese workers and women workers. The Beijing government, under the influence of the growing labor movement, had to accept some measures to change the working conditions in industry. Such a measure was the publication of the Act on Labor Protection in Factories, published on March 29, 1923. This law somewhat softens the terrible regime that existed in industry. It prohibits entrepreneurs from using child labor; boys under 10 and girls under 12; night work is only allowed for men over 17 and women over 18. The use of adolescent labor in all unhealthy and life-threatening industries is completely prohibited. This act then introduces for the first time provisions, to some extent aimed at protecting motherhood, hitherto completely unknown to the Chinese industry, providing women before and after childbirth for a total of 5 weeks with maintenance, at a slightly reduced rate. Of course, this situation is far from ideal, but for a Chinese worker, who is still forced to continue working immediately after giving birth under the threat of being deprived of a piece of bread, such a privilege would be a great relief. 'The whole trouble, however, is that this law has remained an ordinary piece of paper. Due to the lack of a supervisory apparatus, such as a labor inspectorate, no one monitors the implementation of the new rules. Therefore, according to Woodhead, publisher of the English newspaper Beijing End Tian Tzin Times, these rules “remain completely unknown to the Chinese authorities in most of the country and no attempt has been made anywhere to enforce them.” This law applies only to foreign enterprises. settlements, but even here its violations and deviations from the rules are quite frequent. In general, the position of the female worker in most factories remained the same. The rule of 'granting a week's leave to an employee before and after childbirth is almost never applied in practice, since the workers themselves, fearing dismissal, refuse to take this leave. The shameless, egregious exploitation of the Chinese worker continues. From childhood, a woman falls into this bondage; completely losing her personal life, breaking away from her children, she becomes a slave to a machine that sucks out all her blood, destroying her health. A little by little oppressed Chinese woman) realizes the need to fight against this exploitation, joining the ranks of the fighters for the emancipation of China.

4. Women's movement in China
The disenfranchised and semi-slave position of the Chinese woman was the result of the economic and social order and was reinforced by religious norms (Confucianism). True, there were periods in the history of China when women enjoyed broad rights and even had supreme power, but this, of course, only concerned women of the privileged classes. In the third century AD women have been given access to social activities, and it is known that many of them have made their way to senior positions. In the same century, for the first time, a woman, Empress Lü from the Han dynasty, sat on the Chinese imperial throne. In the Seventh Century, in the era of the Tang Dynasty, Empress Wu, an autocratic and despotic woman, seized power — by the end of her reign, she had reached megalomania. This empress strove to introduce complete equality of rights between women and men; under her, women were admitted to public tests, withstanding which they could enter the civil service. However, as in previous cases, this reform proved to be short-lived and ceased to exist along with the reign of its creator. Finally, already in the XX century, we again see a woman on the throne of the Heavenly Empire in the person of the famous reactionary, the Dowager Empress Tsi-Xi. In the seventh century, some privileges were granted to women by Emperor Tang-Ming-Huang (Tang Dynasty), a representative of the Chinese "enlightened absolutism" who promoted the arts and sciences and abolished the old common that women were required to cover their faces with veils. However, all these reforms were aimed at to the improvement of the position of the Chinese woman (of course, women of the privileged classes) "and her equalization in the rights of men were episodic and were not firmly grafted into everyday life. On the contrary, over time, the enslavement of women became stronger. In the past centuries, there were no preconditions for The closure of access to education, difficult material conditions, power, tradition and custom made the woman of the lower classes an educated, downtrodden and often conservative.Such conservatism is still especially strong in the Chinese countryside, whose everyday life has remained the same was many centuries ago. More fertile ground for feminist ideas in the privileged strata of Chinese society, where the number of educated women was gradually increasing and who, earlier than others, came into contact with foreigners who brought Western ideas about Nseng equality. The first beginnings of the women's movement took place precisely at the "top" and were of a very narrow and purely bourgeois character; so it should be noted the existence of a secret female society "Golden Orchid", which expressed women's protest against the oppression of marriage; the girls who belonged to this society swore an oath never to marry, but if they were forced to do so, they resorted to suicide. This society caused serious alarm in the ruling circles and incurred severe persecution. However, these aspirations extended to a very small and closed circle of Chinese women and did not penetrate the masses, to whom they were alien and incomprehensible. In the history of the Chinese women's movement, it is necessary to especially note the activities of the ardent revolutionary and social activist Qiu-Jin. Coming from a bureaucratic family, Qiu-Jin decisively breaks with the oppressive conditions of life, leaves her family and devotes herself to the Chinese revolutionary movement and especially to the struggle for the emancipation of a Chinese woman. She begins propaganda in favor of the elimination of the custom of bandaging the legs, equalizing the rights of women with men and active participation of women in the social movement. Qiu-Jin in 1905 joined the ranks of the revolutionary party led by Sun-Yat-Sen (later transformed into the Kuomintang party. After an unsuccessful uprising in the Jiang-Su province, Qiu-Jin was captured by the Manchu troops and in July 1906 was executed in Qiu-Jin was a forerunner of the participation of women in China in the revolution, but at first only a few women from among the Chinese intelligentsia followed her path. The process of capitalization of China gave the impetus to this mass modern movement. The development of the commodity economy fettered the village with city ​​and drove tens of thousands of peasant girls into industry. We already know the difficult, gloomy conditions that existed in Chinese enterprises for all workers, and especially for female workers. However, the process of drawing the Chinese female masses into industry had some positive aspects. for production, the Chinese girl parted with that conservative, Old Testament way of life, which brought up and her obedient slave. She quickly becomes familiar with the urban culture, observes the social activities boiling around, sees the efforts of the advanced part of Chinese society aimed at uniting the homeland, at fighting against foreign invaders and indigenous reactionary satraps; participating in production activities, earning a livelihood with her own labor, she gets used to seeing herself as a completely independent person and seeks to win a position equal to that of a man. Working in the factory, along with thousands of other women workers, awakens in her a sense of class solidarity, intensified by the influence of unlimited exploitation. Thanks to all these whale conditions Women workers are becoming the social group that is called upon to lead the revolutionary women's movement and become its core, concentrating around itself other more backward and less organized strata of Chinese women.For the success of the women's movement in China, it was necessary to spread literacy among the female masses and create a significant number of educated people. knowledgeable leaders. At the beginning, female youth rushed to foreign schools and colleges, since these were the only educational institutions where a girl could receive a more or less broad education and join Western culture. However, * these schools, especially those in England and America, filled with the usual puritanical hypocrisy, bigotry and boastful chauvinism, very soon ceased to satisfy the emancipated young Chinese women. The harsh reality and conspicuous methods of foreign oppression did not fit the principles that were presented to them by foreign educators who were trying to prove that foreigners are disinterested benefactors and friends of the Chinese people, called to heal all their ulcers with the light of the Anglo-Saxon civilization and the Christian faith. The exploitation of workers in the enterprises of foreign capitalists, the mockery of foreigners against the Chinese on their own land, the shooting of the Shanghai peaceful demonstration in 1925, the bombing of the defenseless cities of Wangxiang and Nanjing and many other acts of foreign imperialism proved to the Chinese workers and women workers all the sweetness of the fruits of this notorious civilization and pushed women's movement to the camp of revolutionary nationalists fighting for the liberation of China. The women's movement becomes part of the national revolutionary struggle. The Kuomintang Party, which put forward in its program the slogan of the emancipation of women and her equal participation with men in public life, seeking to improve working conditions, Chinese workers and women workers, attracted an increasing number of Chinese women into its ranks. The schools for women workers opened by the Kuomintang attracted most of the female students from foreign schools. A special women's section is formed in the Kuomintang, which is growing and gaining strength every day. The Zhenotdel of the Central Committee of the Kuomintang, even before the great offensive of the revolutionary troops in the North, launched extensive work in the province of Guangdong, in the propaganda and political education of the female masses; Through the efforts of the women's department, special women's workshops were organized, at which there are evening courses for female workers studying literacy and the basics of the Kuomintang program. One of the most prominent female workers of the Kuomintang women's department is the widow of the leader of the Chinese revolution, Sun-Yat-Sen, Sun-Ching-Ling. During the life of the late leader, she was invariably his faithful student and assistant. Now she is actively working by joining the left wing of the Kuomintang, being recently elected to the Central Committee. Sun-Jing-Ling opened a school for the political education of women in Hankow in February 1927, attracting many female students. Of course, there are two trends here too: one more conservative, represented by women of the very Chinese bourgeoisie that inspires the right-wing Kuomintang, who believes that perestroika the life of a Chinese woman, based on a thousand-year tradition, should be carried out gradually, the other should be radical, striving for radical immediate reforms. The correspondent of the American magazine "Aba" Anna Strong, who visited Canton in 1925 and with the assistance of the widow of Sun-Yat-Sen, who attended a meeting of the Kuomintang women's organization, notes this controversy between moderate and extreme elements; a representative of the moderate Liao-Chun-Kai, the widow of a prominent revolutionary, a prominent worker of the Kuomintang women's section in her re-Ris. 3. Sun-Tszii-Ling, the wife of Sun-Yat-Sen. chi advocated the need for a careful, gradual approach to the struggle against the old way of life, which had been entrenched for 3000 years and still extremely strong among peasant women, where leg bandaging still exists, the former form marriage, etc. Her speech was rebuffed by a representative of the working youth, who argued that such half-hearted methods were useless and that a decisive struggle was necessary. “Weizhou Walls were also strong for 3 thousand years, but our Wampu cadets took them,” she concluded. ') • For the first time, the participation of a woman in the anti-imperialist struggle was manifested in the student movement. Female students in large centers in China, along with male students, actively participated in organizing demonstrations and boycotts against foreign imperialism. Such cases took place: after the signing of the Versailles Peace Treaty, which illegally ceded the original Chinese territories to the Japanese, when the students organized a grandiose boycott of Japanese goods, during numerous anti-imperialist demonstrations in Shanghai and Beijing. In May 1925, riots broke out in the Beijing Women's High Normal School, directed against the administration and took such a sharp form that the authorities decided to close the school altogether. Since the women's movement and the participation of women in the general revolutionary movement relied mainly on the female intelligentsia, the present period is characterized by the transition of the leadership role to the workers. The involvement of women workers in the Chinese professional movement, numerous women's strikes, the growth of political consciousness and the activity of women the movement has found its social base. In Canton, where the power of the national Kuomintang government has existed for several years, the professional movement among women has developed much more successfully than in other areas of China that were under the rule of reactionary militarists. The organization of trade unions and their struggle against the capitalists in the large industrial centers of Central and North China was extremely difficult because of the political conditions that existed here. However, workers and women workers are waging a relentless and stubborn struggle, expressed in a grand strike-zone movement. Shanghai became the center of this movement — the citadel of foreign imperialism in China. In 1923, there were more than 60 strikes in textile factories in Shanghai, in which over 15,000 female workers took part. In 1924, the strike movement was accompanied by intensified trade union organization, which was hindered by entrepreneurs. Meeting in Canton on May 1, 1925, the II All-China Congress of Trade Unions consisted of 287 delegates, representing 165 unions, which united up to 540,000 workers and women workers. The main demands put forward by the Chinese working class and the Kuomintang party are: freedom of association and strikes, an 8-hour workday for adults, a ban on night work for teenagers under 18, 8-week maternity leave and an 8-week postpartum leave for hard-working women labor and six weeks for other workers, equal pay for men and women, etc. e. The next All-China Congress, which met in May 1926, already consisted of 500 delegates, including 15 female workers. Most1 Chinese trade unions are united in the All China Federation of Labor, which, according to the decision of the Chinese Congress of Trade Unions, joined the Red Profintern. The involvement of the female workers in the Chinese trade union movement is extremely important for revolutionizing the Chinese women's movement. The events in Shanghai in the summer of 1925 were a powerful new impetus that shook the laboring masses of women and intensified the activity of women's organizations. In February 1925, protests began in Shanghai against the intolerable regime in textile factories, the Japanese company Nagai Wata. The management of these factories systematically fired male workers, replacing them with women, who, of course, were shamelessly exploited, setting their daily wages at 20 Mexicans. cents (20 kopecks); in addition, abuse and beatings, unreasonable dismissals, etc. were often practiced.The strike, in which 40,000 workers and women workers took part, lasted 11 days and, thanks to the staunchness of the strikers and the intervention of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce, ended successfully, however, the Japanese capitalists verbally acknowledged the demands workers, continued the old methods. At the same time, workers' unrest began in the Japanese factories of Qingdao (Shan-Tung province), where the Japanese suppressed these unrest by brutal repression. In Shanghai, a textile workers' strike resumed, accompanied by clashes between workers and the administration, during which 1 worker was killed and 30 workers were wounded. On May 30, 1925, on this occasion, a grandiose peaceful demonstration of workers and students was organized in Shanghai, which was brutally shot by the British police of the Shanghai settlement. These events, which sparked a new general strike, shook the working class of all of China. Women's organizations were also active and militant. The women's movement, until then concentrated in Guang Dong, swept the entire country, assuming a pronounced anti-imperialist militant coloration. Up to 24,000 women workers have already taken part in the strike movement at the textile, silk and tobacco factories of Shanghai. 4, Workers rally in Canton. Workers' Day on March 8, which was first celebrated in China in 1924 in only one Canton, the next 1925 was already organized in other large cities of China: in Shanghai, Beijing, Tian Tzin in the provinces Hu-nan, Hu-Bei, Shandun, etc. About 1 million women took part in these grandiose female demonstrations. In Canton, in addition to female workers, more backward female artisans and peasant women were involved in the March 8 celebration. The organization of these demonstrations was carried out by the Chinese Communist Party, in full contact with the Kuomintang Women's Department. Under the Central Committee and all the provincial organs of the Chinese Communist Party, women's departments were organized to develop energetic activities primarily among female workers. Since then, the women's movement in China has assumed a certain communist tinge. The desire of conservative elements to prevent women from participating in the preparing national conference of China provoked a violent protest from women's organizations, which realized that the immutable truth that the more complete emancipation of the Chinese woman can be achieved only through the Communist Party. “We have suffered defeats so far because we have not sharply differentiated ourselves from the possessing classes. If the women's movement does not go hand in hand with the communists who seek to overthrow the power of capital, then its goal - the liberation of working women - will never be achieved, ”says the appeal of the women's department of the Shanghai Kuomintang organization. In the areas occupied by the reactionary generals, women's organizations all the time participated in popular movements and demonstrations against imperialism and its agents. In Beijing, during a large anti-Japanese demonstration, three female students participating in the demonstrations were killed. This circumstance further inflamed the militant and revolutionary fervor of the women's movement; in the provinces of Changsha and Hu-Nan, a campaign was organized to recruit women into the ranks of the Kuomintang party, dedicated to the memory of these 3 victims, as a result of which many women joined the Kuomintang. In Central China, women made up about ZOO / o in demonstrations against U-Pei-Fu, who at that time still ruled in the valley of the river. Yang Tzu. The great offensive of the Cantonese army, which began in the summer of 1926, and the rapid occupation of the most important regions of Central China was noted in Fig. 5. Women's detachments in the Revolutionary Army. The tremendous upsurge of the revolutionary mass of the masses. The advancing Cantonese troops in the occupied regions received an enthusiastic, joyful reception from the workers and, most importantly, from the peasantry, hitherto apolitical. The women's section of the Kuomintang also developed an active work to organize the female masses in the occupied provinces and to serve the national revolutionary army. Women organize medical services, Red Cross units, propaganda cells, etc. Here is the appeal of women's organizations to the soldiers of the Cantonese Army: “The popular offensive aims to free the people from the yoke and tyrannical control of the imperialists and to extend the Kuomintang power to northern China. The success of the offensive depends on each of you. You must be willing to sacrifice yourself for the interests of the people. A revolution can never be the work of one person. Everyone, be he a man or a woman, should take part in the common cause. We women, not being able to fight, voluntarily undertake propaganda, medical assistance and service to the army. May this help you in our common mission of fighting the imperialists. " At the present time we are faced with the fact of differentiation of the Chinese nationalist movement. The leadership of the revolutionary movement is leaving the hands of the bourgeoisie, frightened by the growth of the class struggle and occupying a half-hearted position, and passing into the hands of the working masses, led by the left wing of the Kuomintang together with the Chinese Communist Party. The powerful political movement of the proletariat, culminating in the March workers' uprising in Shanghai, which placed it in the hands of the Canton Army, revealed the colossal role played by the working class in the Chinese revolution. Likewise, the women's movement in China is losing its vague intellectual character, merging with the general labor movement. The female workers who have become the vanguard of the women's movement are increasingly drawn into trade unions and are drawing closer to the Communist Party, realizing that the full triumph of the idea of ​​women's equality can come only after the overthrow of capitalism. The fact that 2 women were elected to the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party indicates an increase in the role of women workers in the Chinese communist movement. The right flank of the nationalist movement is too conservative for a woman in China to expect from it a radical change in the foundations of the old way of life. Now the Chinese revolution is waging a decisive battle against all hostile forces. The future of the new China depends on the outcome of this deadly decisive struggle. The success of a genuine national revolutionary movement, breaking the yoke of foreign oppression and Chinese reaction, together with it will break the narrow framework of the old way of life and turn the Chinese toiler from a slave, oppressed in the Family and "tea houses", mercilessly exploited in factories, into a free, equal member of society. building a new China, on a par with his fellow man.