3. Tatarka before October
The system of national oppression of the Tatar people, the difficult economic conditions of the Tatar working masses, their oppression, darkness and lack of culture in the era of tsarism, delayed the development of the Tatars and created their own settled way of life here, constrained by the conservative norms of Islam and "Sharia". As already mentioned, national and religious the policy of Russian administrators in most cases achieved the opposite results. The Tatar masses held on to their identity even more firmly and protected the inviolability of the Muslim culture, way of life and customs from foreign influences. The Muslim clergy enjoyed tremendous influence and authority and were the guardian of the laws and rules of Sharia. With the development of revolutionary sentiments among the Tatars, the clergy begins to play a clearly reactionary role, opposing all new trends and turns into an agent of Russian tsarism in its struggle against the liberation movement. One of the cornerstones of the old Muslim way of life is the family structure and the position of women. Just like among other Muslim peoples, the Tatar woman occupied a servile position; social life, education, the possibility of independent work and existence were tightly closed for her. If before the revolution there is some kind of turning point in this sense for a woman from the upper circles of the city, the village continues to sleep like death until the October Revolution. Even now, despite the persistent and long work of the party and the authorities in the field of restructuring life, its vestiges still survived in the Tatar village. Tatar villages are usually located in river valleys at a short distance from one another, along the banks. Getting into a Tatar village, you immediately feel a special oriental flavor that distinguishes it from Russian villages. The buildings here do not follow the same straight line crossed by the transverse streets; they are scattered randomly, now piling up on top of each other, now forming wide and empty holes x). Streets along the east are narrow and crooked, bending in frequent alleys, turns and dead ends. Houses don't go straight out into the street; they stand in the back of a courtyard lined with greenery and fenced in. Fence, i.e. its appearance, here can serve as a sign that determines the degree of prosperity of its owner. If it is carefully and carefully knitted together, decorated in abundance with carvings and variegatedly painted, then this means that you are in front of the court of a Tatar rich man or mullah; among the middle peasants, the view of the fence is much more modest, and the poor population loafs around it somehow and does not care about pomp. In a Tatar peasant family, as in the rest of the East, a girl does not enjoy such privileges as a boy. The cherished desire of most parents expecting a child, especially their first child, is to have a boy; having a girl in such cases is disappointing. From the earliest years, the Tatar peasant girl began to get used to her destiny: to be the property, the thing of a man, cut off from any opportunity to get the right to independence or simply to personal life. From now on and until the end of her life, her only duties were reduced to children, kitchen, washing clothes and other household and field work. In more prosperous families, the girl, of course, does not do all this black work; there she lives a monotonous, dreary, animal life. 'When she reaches the age at which, according to the Sharia, she should get married, the parents begin to look for a suitable groom. B most cases, matchmaking was carried out without the participation of young people, exclusively through negotiations between parents; in the same cases, when matchmaking was the result of mutual love between already familiar young people, the custom obliges the groom to act through the parents, without whose will the marriage was impossible. The Tatars' matchmaking ceremony was approximately as follows. The groom's parents send the matchmaker or matchmaker to the bride's parents, mostly to the father. A long conversation is being conducted here, starting from afar and only then moving on to its direct goal. The matchmaker, on behalf of the groom, negotiates the size of the "kalym". Kalym is a customary ransom given by the groom for the concession of the bride to him. This custom, whose roots go back to the most ancient times of nomadic life, in itself is a reflection of the slavish position of women among the Tatars. The marriage here is not a free union between a boy and a girl, but simply the purchase of a wife. It is bought as a thing, as a household item. After talking with the matchmaker, the bride's father consults with his wife and then both of them negotiate with the daughter. Of course, everything goes well if the young were already familiar with each other and had already decided everything among themselves. But there are often cases when a girl does not know her betrothed at all or does not feel any attraction to him. Then it is a real tragedy for her, because the will of her family is unshakable and undeniable. It should be noted that among the poor, marriage was arranged much easier, since here the material calculation of the parents played less important, except for the occurrence of those cases when a well-to-do man wooed a poor girl. In wealthy peasant families and among urban merchants, marriage was mostly a bargain. After the matter has been settled in principle, the lengthy preparations for the wedding begin. During all this time, the young do not see each other. The groom sends gifts to the bride, she, in turn, prepares gifts for the groom: usually, these are embroidered towels for washing the face and hands and wedding onuchi (ayakchuu On the day appointed for the wedding, all guests go to the groom and from there they go with him to the bride's house, where they are met by her parents and some of the guests.The bride remains in her room with several women, most often old aunts, awaiting the arrival of the groom.First, several men, playing the role of witnesses, enter her and ask her once again whether she would agree to be a wife and, according to custom, she is silent until the question is repeated three times and only then gives an affirmative answer.Finally, the groom is brought into the room and then, finally, the formal acquaintance of the young is made, after which the strangers leave, leaving the bride and groom alone. after the mullah, according to all the prescriptions of Muslim custom, marries the young, the groom usually stays with the bride for several days dedicated to the wedding. irestham. This custom, however, takes place only in wealthy homes. After these days, the groom takes the bride to his house, where she begins a new phase of her life, which lasts until her death. The appearance of a Tatar woman, both a peasant woman and a city woman from the middle classes, until recent years retained all the features of the national Tatar type, sharply distinguishing her from the neighboring Russian peasant women, The style of clothing and jewelry of the Tatar woman remained unchanged for centuries, and only the revolution, accompanied by the involvement of women in industry, the destruction of the previous foundations of family life and religious prejudices, began to gradually displace the national costume, replacing it with a more comfortable conventional clothes. On the other hand, even before the revolution, some Europeanization of the costume took place among the women of the upper Tatar bourgeoisie, who followed the path of Russification. This costume looks like this. All women from a very young age to a ripe old age wear long, closed dresses with long sleeves. These dresses for wealthier women are made of chintz, for the poor they are made of homespun linen and are painted in different colors, while older women have more colorful coloring. Under the dress, Tatar women wear wide trousers, but Turkish women differ from wide trousers and do not look out from under the dress, and a special bib, a doll. According to custom, a Tatar woman is never shown without a headdress. However, a Tatar woman does not wear a veil or a burqa; she usually ties her head with a handkerchief, and when she leaves the house, she puts a large kerchief over it, the ends of which fall on her chest. Sometimes older women put on a small cap over the headscarf, while young girls tie the headscarf not on the chin, but across the forehead on the back of the head, leaving their ears open; on holidays, however, they wear caps, covering them with a scarf when leaving. Of the jewelry worn by a Tatar woman, the most common and typical are bracelets, mostly silver, a bracelet, that is, an adornment made up of large silver coins, woven into a braid on a cord, and earrings, also extremely popular among Tatars. It should also be noted that Tatar women are very fond of various cosmetics to decorate the face. The majority of Tatar women, from bourgeois urban women to peasant women, always paint their faces; then usually Tatar women resort to eyebrow tinting, and in more prosperous layers this is done with the help of antimony contained in special bottles, and women more poorer replace antimony with simple pencils; finally, very often nails are painted red, and married women even paint their teeth black *). When a Tatar woman gets married, especially a peasant woman, there comes a time of lifelong seclusion. Her only duty is to obey her husband's will meekly and accurately; The only circle of her activities is chores around the house. A married Tatar woman in a poor and middle-class house devotes the whole day to the housekeeping, babysitting the children, cooking, sewing, washing clothes, cleaning the yard and the hut. She is in a hurry to do everything on time, otherwise her husband may severely punish her. If he is harsh in nature, then the punishment is very heavy. The woman in these cases was completely helpless and left to the complete arbitrariness of her master. Tsarist laws did not care at all about protecting her personality; about protecting her from male autocracy and despotism. Quite often, even the husband's murder of his wife remained without consequences, thanks to the dull formalism of the authorities, who adhered to the letter of the law. An old Tatar public figure, Comrade Abrui Saifi, tells a very interesting fact that clearly illustrates the degree of enslavement of a Tatar woman in the family and her defenselessness from insecurity. her husband's arbitrary will. In 1910, in one of the villages of the former Chistopol district, the husband, returning home, did not receive dinner on time, then he, ruined by this disobedience, poured boiling water over the unfortunate woman, after which she died in terrible agony. When Abrui Saifi, who decided to punish the murderer, went to court, they refused to accept her complaint on the grounds that she herself was not the victim or her closest relative. Of course, with such an attitude of the authorities, husbands could calmly continue their abuse of the wife's personality and even carry out savage reprisals against her to please their tyranny, like the one just described. In well-to-do peasant or bourgeois urban Tatar families, women had less hard and dirty housework. But even there, a woman's life was very unenviable. A Tatar woman had to live in a separate half, dragging out a monotonous, viscous existence. She rarely left the house; when guests came to her husband, she usually did not show herself to them. It was especially hard for a young married Tatar woman if her marriage was not concluded for love. She had to bury herself forever, without any hope of personal happiness. Cheating on her husband in the old Tatar way of life built on Sharia law was considered a grave crime; however, according to Sharia law, divorce on the initiative of the wife was unacceptable. Finally, mention should be made of the terrible antihygienic conditions that were so disastrously reflected on the body of the Tatar woman, ruining many lives. The Tatar city woman resorted to the help of doctors, while the peasant woman almost never. Dirty healers with irresponsible ease did their job, often ending in death from childbirth or disease. It was not possible to engage in social activities, science or even just independent work. Women were usually little involved even in field work; This partly explains the fact that among the Tatar population there was so little developed gardening, which is mainly the lot of women. The only job available to a woman in the conditions of this reclusive existence was needlework. Just like in ancient Russia in the era of terem life, or in women's monasteries, needlework in Tataria reached a high stage of development. Artistic homespun products: tablecloths, towels, napkins and gold embroidery of various tubes, caps, shoes, etc., made by Tatar women, were brought directly to perfection. Seclusion killed all her energy and independence in a woman, belittled her, reduced her to a degree some kind of pet. The road to education was closed for women. They were not allowed in the men's madrasah. There were special women's schools for them; in fact, these were not schools, but simply special female teachers gathered groups of girls at home, taught them to read in Tatar and Arabic, analyzed chapters from the Koran with them and taught them about some issues of the Muslim religion. On this, the education of the Tatar girl was cut short. She was not taught to write, considering it an unnecessary luxury. The revolution of 1905 was the strong impetus that pushed forward the cause of women's liberation. As a result of the shift that has taken place in Tatarstan, a new social movement is emerging with a liberal tint. Its participants were representatives of a small Tatar intelligentsia who had visited more cultured Muslim countries: Turkey, Syria, Egypt, etc. They dreamed of creating a new Muslim culture, of adapting the norms and prescriptions of the Koran to modern life, to their environment, of reconciliation and the fusion of Islam with European civilization. Tatar writers, thinkers and public figures of the new formation strove to spread enlightenment among the backward Tatar masses, to get rid of those ugly remnants of a conservative life that were still there. Of course, this wave of progressive ideas also touched the women's issue. In addition to the male madrasah, opened in the village of Bobin, Sarapul district, Vyatka province, in which, along with teaching the Koran and theology, classes in various secular sciences were conducted, a special female madrasah was opened, led by one educated woman, Mukhlissa. The male madrasah attracted young Muslims from the most remote regions, just as the female madrasah became the center of women's education among the Tatars. The secular sciences were taught here according to Turkish textbooks and their teaching was led mostly by people educated in Turkey. Both of these schools did not last long. The autocracy was terrified of the spread of enlightenment among the masses and the slightest sign of the awakening of a social movement, and, moreover, Turkish influence among Russian Muslims; therefore, by order of the authorities, both schools were closed. However, it should be noted that the activities of these Muslim progressives can far from claim to be revolutionary.  In essence, they all remained captive to religious prejudices and, speaking only for some partial reforms, did not dare to break with a number of deeply reactionary and ridiculous Sharia institutions. In particular, this was the case with women. One of the prominent representatives of this movement publishes the book "Reconciliation of Polygamy with Hygiene", in which he justifies the Muslim custom of polygamy with the physiological characteristics of men who constantly feel the need for a woman's physical intimacy, while the latter has periods in which such closeness is unacceptable. Another such theologian and writer Musa Bigiev, in his work Fundamentals of Sharia, discussing the appropriateness of the custom of covering a woman's face from male gaze, comes to a curious way out: according to hygiene requirements, the face can be open, but the head and hands should be closed to the hands. Such was the half-heartedness of the first Tatar reformers. However, there is no doubt that a certain shift in the sense of the growth of enlightenment aspirations and even some softening of family tyranny after the 1905 revolution was evident. This shift affected mainly the urban Tatar population, and even then not all, but mainly its bourgeois part. Rich Tatars, on the one hand, still fearfully looking back and fawning at the Muslim clergy, at the same time begin to send their daughters to Russian gymnasiums; some indulgences are allowed in the sense of marriage, in which the daughter's personal desire is already a little taken into account, etc. At the same time, there is a growing thirst of Tatar women for education, for social activity, which already captures wider circles of women. In this regard, men from the urban intelligentsia are gradually beginning to look at a woman with different eyes, discovering valuable human dignity in her. As an echo of the growth of these moods among the Tatars, the famous Tatar novel entitled "The Beggar's Daughter", which began to appear in a Tatar newspaper in 1906, deserves attention. His heroine is the daughter of an old Nicholas soldier named Sagadat, who was left an orphan after the death of her father, who died of hunger and poverty. Sagadat, forced to beg, falls into the hands of a young Tatar merchant Abdulla Amirkhanov, who makes her his mistress, and soon abandons her. Then Sagadat sinks lower and lower and finally gets into a brothel. At the same time, Amirkhanov, having met a certain Mansur, a typical representative of the young Tatar intelligentsia, imbued with liberation ideas, succumbed to his influence and, repenting, together with his new friend searches for Sagadat. Despite the indignation and persecution of his relatives and friends, he marries Sagadat. However, the class essence of the young merchant soon made itself felt. During the Japanese war, for the purpose of profit, he becomes a supplier of products for the army and is completely imbued with the spirit of speculation. Sagadat, meanwhile, under the influence of Mansur, ardently strives for education and social activity. Agrarian riots that broke out everywhere do not affect the Amirkhanovs' estates, since the peasants value and love Sagadat for its simplicity, kindness and humanity. Amirkhanov, returning home, is dissatisfied with his wife's liberalism; he continues to treat the peasants harshly, who this time set fire to his estate. The rift in the relationship between spouses is growing. As a result, a break, after which Sagadat, having passed the exam for the matriculation certificate, leaves to study for courses. This novel is highly indicative of the shift in the Tatar public that 1905 brought with it. Here we already see a free and energetic woman, full of good intentions and the will to fight. At the same time, there are already attempts to elucidate the difference between the separate classes of the Tatar population and highlight the reactionary essence of the Tatar bourgeois; ZII. The next blow to the old way of life was dealt by the world war. Kits and mobilizations wrested all able-bodied men from the village. The entire burden of taking care of feeding the family fell on the women. Thus, the Tatar peasant woman ceases to be a passive, helpless creature and becomes the breadwinner of the family; accordingly, of course, her psychology also changes. Masses of peasants rush to work in the city. Women earning their own food on their own are no longer rare, but quite common. All this created the preconditions for! ' the birth of a genuine mass women's movement., The February Revolution is its starting point. In general, the position of the Tatar toiler after February almost did not change for the better, but nevertheless the women's movement received some freedom of action. More and more revolutionary sentiments are being spread among the female masses. In June 1917, there were serious unrest in Kazan among the working Tatar women. At the rally, representatives of the committee of Muslim soldiers are vigorously demanding an immediate end to the war. After the rally, the women go to the city council, seizing the workers and employees of shops along the way, and there they arrest the city head. This development of the mass movement has seriously alarmed the privileged groups of the Tatar population! and first of all, the Muslim clergy, who saw in him a threat to the centuries-old, patriarchal way of life and a social system based on Islam and Sharia. As a counterbalance, the organization of bourgeois and intellectual women's societies begins. These societies sought to improve the position of women within the bourgeois system; they remained unconditionally loyal to Islam and its precepts and campaigned for an end to class strife and the unification of women of all classes. The Tatar merchants and clergy not only did not oppose these organizations, but, on the contrary, openly helped and financed them. In April 1917, the 1st All-Russian Congress of Muslim Women was opened in Kazan, the overwhelming majority of which were precisely these very bourgeois intellectual elements. ... Naturally, the resolutions adopted at the congress were carried out in the same vague, indefinite tones, did not advance the cause of women's liberation a single step, and did not in any way improve the position of the Tatar toiler. Meanwhile, the truly revolutionary elements are organizing Muslim socialist committees, which are developing work among working women under the slogan of the power of the soviets and the proletarian revolution; under these committees are organized: a bureau of soldiers, a bureau of domestic servants, a society of women handicraftsmen (shapers, seamstresses, embroiderers, etc.). The socialist committees launch a fierce struggle against the reactionary Tatar bourgeoisie and Mel-lami. At the May All-Russian Congress of Muslims in Moscow, the revolutionary elements, despite the fierce opposition of the mullahs, achieved the adoption of resolutions demanding full women's equality, but at the next July All-Russian Congress, the clergy, supported by bourgeois intellectual groups, achieved the abolition of the resolutions of the previous congress ... This was followed by severe persecution and persecution of organizations of working Tatar women, by the clergy and the bourgeoisie, which stopped thanks to the October Revolution, which brought the Tatar toiler a real complete emancipation.