2. Pre-revolutionary oirat
Double oppression — the Russian colonial-economic enslavement of the region and the remnants of the tribal system in family life — rests on the shoulders of the pre-revolutionary oirat. She is a slave in the full sense of it! the words. Echoes of that ancient form of family life, when a woman was the same common property of the family, like a herd of horses or a herd of rams, to the last! time preserved in a number of customs, consolidating its slave servitude position. On the other hand, the atmosphere of economic ruin of the Oirat population, which came with the Russian colonization, to an extraordinary degree worsened this situation, reducing the Oirat to the role of a cruelly exploited worker, due to whose labor not only the family lived, but also the predators of the Russian, commercial and bureaucratic world The following facts are characteristic for the clarification of the position of the oiratka in the past, in connection with the remnants of the tribal life. Among the Oirats, children cannot call their father by name, just as the words "son" or "daughter" are not used in their language, being replaced by the words "child" or "girl". The historical explanation for this lies in the fact of the woman's former belonging to the whole family, when the mother, naturally, could not know the father of her child, and when the very concept of paternity did not take place. A number of survivals from the family life of the Oirots confirm the correctness of this conclusion. Altaians have no right to enter a married woman. the dwelling of the father-in-law is farther than the threshold, to bare his head, arms or legs in his presence, to transfer something to him from hand to hand and generally enter into any kind of intercourse with him, even if they are limited to a simple joke. For Teleuts, women's clothing has a high collar and narrow casing at the sleeves specially for this purpose (not to open the head, chest and arms in the presence of the husband's older relatives), and the headdress is never removed. All these 'rules were introduced, undoubtedly, during the transition from family marriage to personal marriage, and had as their task to protect a man from encroachment on his wife by other members of the family, especially his older relatives. Thus, we see that in ancient times human rights were not recognized at all for the Oirat woman. She was the property of the clan, a common slave and a common concubine, which the clan probably bought or kidnapped from its neighbors. This method of buying and selling a wife has been preserved until recently. Under the strict exogamous system of marriage (the wife is taken necessarily from a foreign clan), the wife is acquired for money (kalym), and she breaks off all ties with relatives and cannot return to them of her own free will. The husband, of course, is a complete master and can, if he wishes, send her back, but she herself is his property 'and has no right to do so. In the event of a husband's death, she remains in his family, as part of the inheritance, and often even passes over as a wife! to his brother or other close relative. She can return to her previous clan, to her family, only if the kalym is returned back, that is, it was redeemed or resold back. This fact alone is characteristic enough to clarify the position that the Oirat occupies in the family and society. Indeed, is it possible to speak of any economic rights of an oirat, if it is not a subject (carrier), but an object (subject) of ownership? Indeed, we see in the pre-revolutionary Oirat everyday life a complete disregard for women in the sense of giving her at least the most elementary economic independence. The unconditional owner of all family property, including the one brought by the wife as a dowry, is the husband. She is extremely limited in inheritance rights, even when she is not yet married, after the death of her father. In this case, all rights, including the right to sell it for kalym, pass to the son, brother or other male relative of the father. It should be noted that the sale of an oirats as a wife by the Oirats themselves is viewed almost exclusively as an economic transaction. At least the fact that customary law gives a man the opportunity to take a wife before puberty (8-9 years old) proves that one of the main points in marriage is not so much the acquisition of a wife as the acquisition of a female worker. Below we will try to give a general picture of the life of the Oirat and her role in the working life of the family, from which the value of such an acquisition for the Oirat will become clear and this desire is understandable. Now let us note that the oiratka, of course, did not have any participation in public life or a voice in public administration. In the same way, she was completely devoid of education, even the most elementary. If the general percentage of literacy of the Oirat population gives a figure of 6% (with 20% of Russian literacy), then for the Oirat, the youth drops sharply, giving only a few representatives. What did the Russian "kulturtragerstvo", which the tsarist Russia, imitating the ideologists of the colonial policy of the Western European imperialist powers, loved to justify its predatory conquests Nothing! Or rather, even more than nothing. It aggravated the already difficult situation of the oiratka. We are not even talking about the fact that the first conquerors of Siberia, on the basis of wartime rights, adopted the custom of abducting women from the natives, conducting it only on a massive scale and organizing entire expeditions that literally left entire villages or even regions without a female population. They “needed” women, and they got them, however, at the expense of the natives. According to Belyavsky, "many foreigners died single, since all foreign women were taken away by the Russians." And yet the main evil was not this, but that the ruin of the Oirat economy, which came with the "yasak" collected by the greedy administration, and a kind of "trade" practiced by the predatory merchant, and the general impoverishment of the entire Oirat population hit hardest of all a woman. If before the relative prosperity brightened her life at least a little, now there is no trace of it. From the economic ruin it was the woman who suffered in the first place. Not to mention the fact that, thus, she was deprived of the opportunity to slightly embellish the home environment, dress or eat better - a significant part of the work was shifted onto her shoulders, on the appropriation of the results of which the Russian merchants and kulaks surrounding the Oirat built their predatory well-being ... Pumping out all kinds of commodity values ​​from the Oirat economy, from livestock to hunting products, they deprived the yuyratku, nair., Milk, which went for watering the young, bought from a native and left to grow from the owner (one of the methods of making money often used in Altai , consisting in the fact that instead of a calf bought for 1 ruble, a merchant or a kulak, in 2-3 years received a whole bull worth 30-50 rubles), furs used by the oirat to decorate a yurt or make clothes, etc. , the sharp decline in economic well-being that came with the Russians, naturally, caused a corresponding pressure from the dominant male part of the population, expressed mainly in c. the rise of demands for women’s labor and the deprivation of women of the most basic material comforts, the oirat gave birth to a child. If it is a son, the father carves out a small bow and arrows, if it is a daughter, he simply cuts off the top of a young birch tree to nail it over the cradle of a newborn '. This actually limits his worries about the new 'family member. Of course, the birth of a son seems to be a more significant phenomenon than the birth of a daughter, being explained by the dominant role played by a man in Oirat society. However, the birth of a daughter does not cause acute disappointment. First, it will grow into a valuable worker. And secondly, and this is of no small importance, when she grows up she can be sold, that is, to marry and get kalym-; as a board. Be that as it may, the child finds his place in the family, and gets his use of a cradle made of bark and filled with rags. From above, he is covered with some kind of blanket or skins and begins to live. All worries about caring for him, lying down, of course, entirely; on the mother, are limited to what is absolutely necessary: ​​at certain intervals he receives mother's milk. Feeding the baby is extremely uneven, p minutes, which the mother can snatch from her almost continuous work. The rest of the time he can scream as much as he wants — adults do not pay any attention to him. And if you remember that the yurt contains whole hordes of parasites, that the smoke from the hearth eats the eyes, and the ice jet creeps to the cradle with everyone entering or leaving the room, then it should be noted that the child has more than legal grounds for screaming. Enough. Above we have already noted the appallingly unhygienic pirate yurt. In relation to the child, she receives, so to speak, harmonious completeness. The baby is washed only once, at birth. This first washing is, in fact, limited to his acquaintance) with water. In the future, it is only occasionally smeared with fat, which replaces the washing of the Oirats. Often, calves, lambs and puppies are brought up in the yurt at the same time as the child. All departures are made by them, of course, right there, so that the atmosphere in which the child spends his first months is saturated with suffocating fumes. Without knowing at all the linen or washing those rags with which he is wrapped, the child is doomed to grow and develop in such an environment that only a very viable organism can withstand. Infant mortality, naturally, is enormous, and it is this that is one of the main reasons for the gradual extinction of the Oirats. Potential epidemics are given ample room for development here. In addition, syphilis brought in by the Russians clearly demonstrates its destructive effect on a number of children affected by rickets: thin, long arms, a large head, a swollen belly and crooked legs are very common among Altai children. As the child grows, his life or, rather, the surrounding the situation is changing are very insignificant. The child is very early weaned from the mother's breast and transferred first to cow or horse milk, and then to the usual food of adults with the inevitable "pusher" (toasted barley flour) and "tuptash", which is made from pieces of dough dipped in boiling water or milk. From early childhood, the Oirat girl begins to show her subordinate position, her female powerlessness. This is primarily expressed in the relationship between brothers and sisters. Growing up, the boy learns and gets used to the contemptuous treatment of the girl, learning to value his "manhood" above all else. There is no greater offense for him than cleaning the yurt, taking care of children or other "female" work. He early gets involved in men's conversations and men's interests, goes to graze livestock or go hunting, drawing pride in these pursuits, contemptuously assessing the work of his sister, offending and insulting her. This difference between a boy and a girl is evident, for example, when a guest visits a yurt. While the boy turns around the guest next to his father, talking, smoking or drinking, with him, a teenage girl fumbles somewhere in the female quarters, flushing mutton intestines or helping her mother prepare a treat; guests are not for her, just as not for women at all. As soon as and as far as her childish strengths allow, the girl is immediately attracted to work in the family, which, as we have already noted, lies entirely with her mother. And the mother, of course, shifts part of this work to the growing daughters. Milking cows and horses, carried out already in the early morning, carrying firewood or brushwood for the hearth, preparing dinner, as well as koumiss and araki, making clothes, supervising children - this is the circle of work into which the girl is gradually drawn, and at the same time in size , very few corresponding to her physical strength. There is very little free time that the boys spend in games. Very early, the girl gets used to decorating herself, decorating her clothes with colorful patches or skins, weaving bugles, beads or even rattles and bells into her hair. Braids, in general, are the subject of the most attentive care of the oirat. The larger the braids and the longer they are, the more it is valued by the Oirats (male Oirats also 'wear a braid). A short braid is considered a shame, and often women weave other people's hair into the braid just to make it longer and thicker. Married women wear two braids, girls wear three, five or seven (always an odd number). When an oirat greets a guest or treats him, she touches her scythe. This replaces her with our handshake or bow. No matter how hard it is for the girl in her own family, the future threatens her with an even more difficult fate. As soon as she grows up, often at a very early age (9-12 years), she gets married, that is, is simply sold by a father or another head of the family, in case of his death, to some Oirat necessarily from a different clan. Until very recently, the sale of girls, even in infancy, was widely practiced, so that it was sold not only in marriage, but also simply as a worker, and the price sometimes dropped to a ruble and below. To a very wide extent, this technique was practiced by Russian merchants and kulaks, who introduced into Oirat use another peculiar way of buying slaves under the guise of recipients (as a spiritual father). Selling in marriage, on the condition of buying a wife for a kalym (ransom), is so typical of the Oirats that it is almost impossible to talk about another form of marriage with them. Rarely, rarely does a “runaway” marriage take place, when an oirat decides to run away from her family because of her strong feelings for some poor man who is unable to pay for her kalym. The wedding itself is accompanied by various kinds of rituals, which strongly reflect the remnants of the clan system and emphasize the woman's servitude, and an inevitable feast. In some places, a special hut is built for the young, from the branches of birch trees, during which they spend three days hopelessly in it. When getting married, an Oirat has to completely break with the usual situation, break away from the south of her family and ail, and this gap is very sharp. She becomes the complete property of her husband. In an alien, most often hostile environment, she can achieve at least only a tolerant attitude towards herself on one condition — complete and unrequited obedience. And the latter, of course, entails the same unrequited performance of work, which she is very generously given in a new family. Not to mention her husband, who doesn’t strike a finger in order to help her in her work, on her, a helpless alien, the mother-in-law and sister-in-law shift the whole burden of domestic suffering, taking the opportunity to ease themselves a little from overwork. As we have already noted above, the position of women among the Oirats is largely due to the fact that she was previously a clan property, a common slave and a common concubine. Therefore, in the transition from generic to personal marriage, a number of shy ones were imposed on the woman. prohibitions to ensure the husband from attempts on his wife by men of his kind. In addition to the prohibition to talk with other men, the lack of access to the male half, especially when there are guests, these prohibitions are very painful for the oirat when they touch her clothes. We have already noted the custom of tying the neck and sleeves with narrow, dense sheathing and constantly wearing a cap on the head of teleut women greatly restricts movement and does not allow free movement even in summer. But apart from these restrictions, the intercourse of the oiratka with outsiders is limited in the most strict way. As a hostess, it is true, she must greet the guest and even bring him to him, holding the braids with her hand, that is, with a bow, -araku, ku-m! s or tea. But with this silent reception of the guest And, in fact, her contact with him ends. In the future, the owner himself treats the guest, talks to him, and the wife has only the extra trouble in making the dishes, which she does in the female half. In the same way, an oiratka rarely goes to visit herself. For this she does not have the most important thing - free time. Whether therefore, somewhere nearby, some feast on the occasion of a birth, wedding, funeral or sacrifice happens — one husband goes to visit. Communication with companions in the ail takes place only in fits and starts: while collecting brushwood, he will exchange family news in passing with a neighbor who is engaged in the same business as she, or will specially go to visit her - these are the primitive and random forms of a woman's participation in public life, which she is provided with the Oirat way of life. Even in religious life she takes the most limited part. First of all, the main religious rite of the Oirats is the solemn sacrifice. takes place, Usually, in some nearby valley, where the kam goes, accompanied by some husbands. The only time a woman is given some role in public ceremonies is at a funeral. Women have the duty to mourn the deceased, which they do, filling the yurt in which the dead is located with crying, lamentations and howling. Thus, the oirat is doomed to live within the interests of the family: the yurt, husband, children and cattle - this is the circle in which she was doomed to spin to the grave, without any hope of an outcome, of improving her situation. And inside this circle is slavery, humiliation and oppression. The husband is the head and the lord, to whom she must conform, all the desires of which she must fulfill, and, of course, there can be no question of any protest or attempts to influence him. It’s also good if the husband is by nature — and it should be noted that most of the Oirats, according to researchers, are distinguished by their peacefulness and gentleness — he does not tyrannize his wife. If, to her misfortune, he is distinguished by cruelty, her position becomes truly hopeless. Life and custom do not then provide her with any ways to oppose anything to male arbitrariness, even in the case of direct physical torture. She can return back to her family only on condition of the return of the kalym, which is only done by exceptional families and in exceptional cases. The right to separate from his wife is given exclusively to the man, who can simply send her back. In a word, pre-revolutionary legality did not give the Oirat any weapon against male arbitrariness and made her completely defenseless in this respect. Extramarital affairs are very common among the Oirats. According to one researcher, "the freedom of sexual relations between Altai sometimes reaches the point that in places of their crowded camps, relations between women and men are sometimes so intertwined that it is impossible to tell who is with whom (is in, legal or illegal relationship." and public opinion does not put any prohibitions on the man in this regard, even the behavior of a woman in these cases is turned a blind eye. Marriage relations also take place before marriage and are not a decisive obstacle to getting married, although, of course, they lower the value of kalym. in view of early marriage, they do not receive such wide distribution as extramarital affairs. The above household scheme of life of the clan Oirat is typical for the vast majority of the Oirat population, although, of course, there are a number of shades in some individual (cases. In addition to local differences explained by tribal peculiarities (see above about telesh birds, teleuts, etc.), which are essentially insignificant, following t note the differences in the life of the oirat, depending on one degree or another, the economic well-being of her husband. In the general outline, we have already noted the presence of a rather strong stratification of the Oirat population. Along with the bulk of the poor peasants' farms, to a great extent ruined by the predatory erection of Russian merchants and kulaks, there are also more powerful economic units formed as a result of the seizure of the "lion" part of the clan property during the disintegration of the clan economy by the clan elders Russian administrative apparatus! for the economic expropriation of places population. The position of the Oirat, who got married or, more precisely, bought by one of the representatives of this Byrat kulak, naturally changes for the better, while, above all, this improvement concerns living conditions, food conditions and the amount of clothing. It should be noted, however, that the characteristic dirt remains an invariable part of housing, clothing and food even among the richest oiratyuvs. The husband's economic well-being also affects the reduction in the amount of work that goes to the oiratka's share. She gets the opportunity to transfer most of them to the captivity of laborers or laborers. On the other hand, the position of the wife of a poor man who is forced to work with her own or Russian kulak is deteriorating accordingly. She already endures the double oppression of the owner and husband, sometimes taking out the bitterness of her own existence on her humility and irresponsibility. We are no longer talking about her living conditions, about her food or clothing — these conditions are such that one can confidently assert: “It never gets worse.” There is another series of differences, essential! influencing the life of the oyratka. It is mainly "not getting married. Although it happens relatively rarely, it does happen. And it should be noted that in this case, her position again sharply deteriorates. First of all, the family is trying to "squeeze" the kalym out of it through increased exploitation, which is deprived of it by this absenteeism. In the future, she finds herself in the position of an eternal slave worker, consistently submitting to the successive heads of the house: if the father died, his older brother takes his place. In the inheritance, she does not take any or very ghostly share of participation. It is remarkable that the oiratka does not even have an idea of ​​the possibility of independent economic existence. She just 'does not understand how a woman can live alone, without the help and guidance of a man. In this respect, the Oirat custom and everyday life allow only one exception. This is when a woman becomes a shaman, a kam woman. Since the latter, according to the religious ideas of the Oirats, cannot be made, but can only be chosen “from above,” “spirits,” and refusal to call is punishable by death, then it is not so rare that this “election” falls on; woman. In this, but only in this case; Oiratka can achieve the same value as a man in society. Her influence, as well as the associated economic situation, destroys the usual norms of relations between a man and a woman., In, in some individual cases, a woman-kam who managed to manifest in some special way: her power in communicating with spirits, and its exceptional "strength", even reaches a predominant value, \ gaining a leading role and the highest authority in the public consciousness. However, even here there is one difference between male kamas and female kamas. While the Kama-men devote themselves to both Ulgen (good deity) and Erlik (evil deity), a woman. can become a kam only on condition of dedication to Erlik: good deity! does not accept women as his servant. Small, but what a characteristic detail. Finally, the last series of everyday features that distinguish individual groups of Oirats is one or another degree of Russian influence. Those of these groups, predominantly of the sedentary or semi-sedentary type, which were most sharply affected by their proximity to Russian settlers, in many ways, and especially in the type of dwelling, clothing and food, adopt Russian forms. Correspondingly, the usual norms of everyday life change somewhat, in a number of details acquiring Russian features. To a certain extent, although very insignificantly, the forms of relations between a man and a woman are also changing, and with them the position of the Oirat in the family and society.