2. The position of the Yakut before the Soviet regime
This is the general situation in which the Yakut lives. In the vast, almost always snowy, open spaces or in the motionless, frost-bound taiga, in lonely fields, separated from each other by tens of frosty miles, constantly driven by the cold in a yurt, she involuntarily concentrates all her interests inside the house. Household, family and neighbors, children and cows — this is the strong and vicious circle that the coldness, distance and custom of Yakutia are holding around her. To break through in it is the task of the new Soviet public of the YASSR. To make the tasks and achievements of the new way of life brighter and clearer, let us first try to give a picture of life inside this ring. “Pre-revolutionary Yakut” is the immediate topic. ”“ A Yakut had a daughter. And although children in general! Are considered “God's blessing”, but “we feed girls for free, educate for people,” say the Yakuts. The time will come for the girl to marry — and the family will part with her, because the marriage of the Yakuts is strictly exogamous, that is, the bride is necessarily taken from someone else's clan. In general, marriage is a moment for a Yakut that sharply separates her whole life. With marriage, all ties with her family, clan, and village are severed. marriage, a Yakut woman ceases to be a member of the tribal union that nurtured her and passes into the clan of her husband.This circumstance leaves an imprint on the first half of her life, before marriage. Looking at her only as a temporary member, the family tries to get from the girl what is possible great benefit and therefore from an early age cruelly exploits her work.Now after birth, the "grandmother" accepting the child carries him to the fire, washes him from the mouth with water, only sometimes warmed up, and rubs him with cream. child and are usually limited to the Yakuts. Rubbing with olives, however, continues and is considered by the population to be incomparably more useful than bathing. The child is placed in a bast shallow, covered with some old rags, shavings, or powdered and dried rotten wood. A tube is placed between the legs to drain urine. From above, the child is covered with a fur blanket and laced up with rem yami. This is the situation in the first days of a child's life. Almost always, from the first days, cow's milk, given in whole form, serves as food for him. As a general rule, Yakut mothers do not breastfeed their children at all, and only sometimes, in young mothers, breastfeeding lasts 30-40 days, after which they switch to feeding from a bottle with undiluted cow's milk. The reason for this is the absence or a very small number of dylok among mothers and strong household chores, which does not allow the Yakut to give the child the necessary time. The feeding itself is carried out irregularly, in appalling hygienic conditions: the dishes are not washed for months. Usually, the baby feeds at night so that he does not disturb the adults with his cry. In the daytime, he is completely abandoned: he can scream as much as he wants from hunger, cold, insect bites or pain: a mother, who counts every minute, busy with housework and hoton, does not have time to give the child even the slightest care. Therefore, the terrifying percentage of infant mortality among the Yakuts is not surprising: it is much higher than 50%. The main scourges are exhausting diarrhea and tuberculous intestinal lesions. The main cause of these diseases is the household environment that separates the child from the mother's breast and maternal care. Having learned to move, the child begins an independent life. Left to himself, he scurries around the yurt, collecting all sorts of cuddly and un-creepy things, gets to the hearth, learning to appreciate the warmth, plays with the dogs, which lick his dirty and greasy body. When the adults leave the yurt, he is tied with a belt to a post for safety. In such an environment, he lives the first years. And here there is an extremely high percentage of children who die from diarrhea, colds or contagious diseases. It should be noted, however, that in these years he receives a relatively large amount of food. Half of the milk yield per cow goes to him, but despite the baby's height, the portions remain the same, if not reduced. He sometimes gets more lunches or he is given the right to lick the dishes after adults. Starting at about three years old, the child receives some clothes: until that time he walks naked. This is how childhood passes: in a dark, suffocating yurt, among dogs and calves, which the Yakuts often keep in the same room where people live. early years, as soon as the opportunity presents itself, the child begins to work. And here the inequality between men and women immediately begins to affect, a black line passing through the whole life of a Yakut. The girl is responsible for housework and cattle care, which boys do very rarely, and then only until they grow up. The girl, on the other hand, has to babysit the younger ones, carry water, go after cattle or sew. Often, not yet knowing how to thread a needle, she sits beside her mother and sews according to her instructions. She must perform sometimes completely unbearable work under the threat of punishment, often carried out enie. Here, from the very first steps, the foundation of that psychology is laid, which teaches a woman to look at herself as a lower being in comparison with a man. The constant ridicule of adults, their contemptuous attitude towards a woman and her work, early teach girls to feel their inferior position, and turn boys away from girls: there is no greater resentment and greater punishment for a Yakut boy than forcing him, for example, to babysit a child or perform some - any other women's work. "We consider our daughters to be outsiders, they will definitely go to the people", "if a woman passes between me and my fire, she can spoil my trade and happiness", "we, the Yakuts, in the old days disdained a woman, considered her filthy ”- these are the current opinions about women. Baba, Baba, Po Babi are words expressing contempt. Even in legends, the hero, wishing to offend another, always calls him "a woman". In such an atmosphere of half contempt and coldness, a Yakut teenage girl grows up, exhausted under the burden of homework, which is just as contemptuously assessed: "no matter how much a woman does, there is no profit." But now the girl becomes a girl. It's time to marry her off. Until recently, marriage among the Yakuts was a trade deal concluded between the parents of the bride and groom. The daughter was sold for a certain amount, according to the agreement, which was preceded by a long dorg. As soon as this agreement on the marriage payment (kalym) was concluded, the marriage contract was considered completed, although the bride remained in the family until the kalym was paid in full. However, after making a part, his groom received the right to go to the bride, and often the latter had a child before she finally moved to her husband's house. In return for the kalym, she brought with her a dowry, the size of which was often also determined by contracts. In the old days, the purchase of a bride was sometimes replaced by abduction (yasyr) among the Yakuts. There are many indications of this in songs and traditions. This custom was adopted by the Russian conquerors, and the Yakut petitions are full of indications of complaints from the population that "service people ... they have a lot of women." Remnants of this custom have survived to this day in wedding ceremonies accompanying a wedding. Very often the groom, (having agreed with the bride beforehand, pushes her to the place where she is waiting for him, throws her on the saddle and rushes away. Women pick up | Fig. 1. Yakut family. Scream, men run out and start mock chase, sometimes lasting a very long time.Participants in the wedding train accompanying the groom do not undress in the bride's house, and their horses remain undressed.There is also undoubted data establishing in the still relatively recent past (the beginning of the 19th century) that the Yakuts had polygamy (polygamy Now this kind of marriage has completely disappeared, although, perhaps, it should be considered a relic of that unusually light view of her husband's unfaithfulness, which was preserved among the Yakuts ("an empty matter -"). Two months after the payment of the kalym and the departure to the yurt husband, the young return to the wife's parents and receive gifts here that partially cover the kalym paid for her.This is where, as a rule, her relations with the family end, and a new life begins, the life of a married married woman s. “It’s good if the water is close, and the wife’s relatives are far away,” says the Yakut proverb. Let us now trace the relationship between the young wife and her husband. “The husband is the lord, he rules and has time; wife I is as good as he is fine, ”say the Yakuts. “The husband is our master. He feeds us, he finds, he protects us, ”the women echo them. The extent to which the consciousness of this submission entered the psychology of the Yakut woman can be judged by the following fact reported by Seroshevsky: “In the city of Verkhoyansk, the Yakut Galka, a weak and lazy man, kept the transport. His wife Nastasya, on the contrary, was distinguished by agility and considerable physical strength. When the waves raged on the river especially strongly, it was not he who left for the transport, but she. This Jackdaw used to beat his wife while drunk, and every time after the husband received money, his wife's face was decorated with lanterns and smudges. When he happened to bother her especially, she grabbed him and, knocking him to the ground or the bed, held him until he was exhausted and calmed down. “Why don’t you beat him well, maybe you would stop fighting,” a Yakut woman was asked once. “It’s impossible,” she replied with a smile, “he’s my husband ... if I beat him, people will stop respecting the man completely, then both of us and the children will feel bad.” - .. ■ The case is typical and typical for understanding the position of a Yakut woman in the family ... And if you remember that, when she got married, she broke off ties with her own family, and entered into a stranger, where she was treated as a stranger, an alien, and united against her, advising her husband to "drive" obedience and respect into her to yourself, the picture will become clear. One Yakut woman, marrying her daughter, weaned her from complaining, crying, even talking. “My daughter,” she said, “you will soon go to the strangers. Daughters-in-law will condemn you, torture you. -A whole series of shy rules reinforced this position. "A woman should not sing loudly in the presence of strangers." “Young women should speak little, in an undertone, not laugh loudly, not interfere with the conversation of men,” these are some of these rules. The only protection for a married woman in the midst of an alien and hostile environment was her husband. And if, to one part, he was distinguished by a stern and cruel disposition, then the young man's position became completely unbearable. In Yakut life, there are frequent cases of suicide of young women caused by harassment from her husband and her town. The whole process of raising a Yakut woman and the atmosphere around her is designed to develop in her fear of her husband and complete obedience to him; a woman does not dare, for example, walk past the fire if her husband is warming himself, or even just looks at him. Contempt for a woman, expressed, for example, in such sayings as "a woman's thought is shorter than a hair," "a woman has hair and debts, but a thought is short," turns into a disregard for women's work. A man considers it shameful for himself to do housework, so that all the work falls entirely on the shoulders of a woman. Meanwhile, this is just the hardest and most exhausting work: in a semi-dark yurt that never sees the sun, in a suffocating atmosphere saturated with the vapors of the hoton, she works continuously: she prepares food, sews, milks the cows and gives them water, cleans them with hot water, pricks firewood, etc. No wonder, explaining the reason for taking the kalym, the Yakuts say: “the worker leaves the house.” A man spends almost the whole day outside the house, in the summer at field work or fishing, in the winter hunting or visiting, a woman But she is chained to a yurt, and only her hard daily work ensures the existence of the family. In this environment, a Yakut woman, exhausted by backbreaking work, gives birth. As a general rule, a Yakut gives birth almost annually, sometimes continuously for 20–25 years. It is not uncommon for one Yakutkiy to have 15-18-20 and even 25 children. This number of births extremely depletes the female body, which, given the tremendous work she carries around the house, and the terrifying antihygienic conditions, leads to an almost epidemic disease of tuberculosis, the scourge of the female population of Yakutia. Here are ominous figures (according to Khaldeev) showing the relationship between female mortality and male mortality, taken as 100: Female age: From 15 to 19 years .... 146.5 "20" 29 ".... 208.5" 30 "39> x ..... 169 , 4 "40" 49 "........ 138.9" 50 "60" ...... 92,524 This table clearly establishes the enormous mortality rate of women, mainly at the youngest, most flourishing age. Let us also note the generally unfavorable ratio between the sex groups of the population, expressed according to the same data as follows: There are women per 100 men: Up to 14 years old .................... 98, 7 "" from 14 "18" .............. 94.9 "" "18" 60 "................ 85.5 What's in These figures play a significant role in tuberculosis, which affects women as a result of exhaustion from childbirth, exhausting labor and, as a result of unsanitary living conditions, the following table proves: For 100 women who died from various causes, there are deaths from tuberculosis: From 15 to 19 years old ...... ... .49 3% "" 20 "29" ...... ... .55.7% "" "30" 39 "...... ... , 56.5% "" "40" 49 ".... • ■ • -49.8%" "" 50 "59" ...... ... 38.90 / 0 All these figures, taken together, raised the question of the extinction of the Yakut population, and even if it is still impossible to give an affirmative answer to it, the enormous mortality rate of women at marriageable age is beyond any doubt and threatens development and the growth of the Yakut population. The general reason for this phenomenon is in the ugly forms of life described above and the difficult situation of the Yakut woman. The same conditions give room for the spread of epidemic diseases (anthrax, scarlet fever, diphtheria, smallpox, etc.). The only means of preventing the spread of infection, used in Yakutia, is isolation. The Yakuts avoid entering the yurt where the sick are, and this circumstance1, due to the rather large distance of the yurts from each other, saves the population from general infection. But the family, where the infection has penetrated, is doomed. According to Dr. Kolpakova, an adult daughter (died), mother, second daughter and 14-year-old son fell ill with typhoid one after another in one yurt of the Cholbo tract - Meitsky nasleg, Udyugey ulus. Of the other diseases, eye diseases with trachoma at the head are especially severe, and the latter gives all sorts of complications, is replete with severe forms and often leads to blindness. A characteristic feature of the female population of Yakutia is the abundance of so-called "emeriaks", a special kind of mentally ill. Among them there are many stages of development from very weak to extremely pronounced forms of the disease, close to complete dementia. A characteristic feature of this disease is the defeat of the will, in weak cases expressed in imitative movements, from which the patients cannot resist, despite the fact that they are aware of the painful nature of their actions. In more severe cases, there is a complete loss of will, in which the patient can on orders; even a completely stranger to sew actions that threaten her life, nair., throw herself into fire or water. At the same time, she becomes dangerous to those around her, for she often rushes with her fists; at them, trying to beat them. Then the Yakuts put such a patient, like other dangerous mentally ill, in a special wooden cage with strong locks. This cage is made of thick logs, and instead of a window, a narrow slit is made in it; the cage is placed near the hearth, and the patients are fed through the gap, keeping them completely naked and only once every 2-3 days cleansing the cage from feces. The picture is truly terrifying! So, among the suffocating yurt, in the bosom of the family, from birth to birth, a Yakut woman, loaded with hard work on the household, lives. In public life before the revolution, she almost does not participate: this is the privilege of a man. If she managed to live in this environment to a relatively old age, she is lucky: children grow up, especially daughters, who are responsible for most of the work; The elders who oppressed her died or became helpless old people who could not be reckoned with. But this situation does not last long. Power in the family is rapidly shifting from old people to young, of course, sons. In the family, a dull struggle begins, caused by the dissatisfaction of the adult sons with their servitude. Almost always, it ends in the subordination of the elderly to the power of the son, unless the father singles him out in advance. He becomes the real ruler of the family, the household fulfills only his orders, and the mother has to drink completely the bitter cup of the acclimatization in her old age, which exists by the grace of the owner, feeds on snacks and is constantly reproached by children. The weaker and more decrepit the parents are, the worse they are treated; they try to take away the remnants of their property, after which they are no longer reckoned with. ; According to Seroshevsky, - he even met in wealthy families “living skeletons, thin, wrinkled, half-naked, or even completely naked, hiding in the corners, - from where they crawled out: only in the absence of strangers, to warm up by the fireplace, pick up together with the guys crumbs of thrown food or quarreling with them because of who should lick the dishes emptied from food. " Public opinion not only does not intercede in such cases for the elderly, but is ready to support his son by mocking old age. "An odd old man, a blind man doing an eversion, turning back," says the proverb. One Yakut, in response to reproaches for cruel treatment of his mother, answered absolutely calmly: “Let him cry ... Let him starve. And I cried from her more than once. " Of course, this kind of phenomenon does not constitute an indispensable condition, but they are ubiquitous and express a general attitude towards the elderly, in which the latter have to recede into the background and be content with the role of hangers-on who are tolerated in the family. And if this is true even in relation to a man, then it is a thousand times more true in relation to a woman, towards whom both the Yakut custom and general conviction bring up a contemptuous and mocking treatment. It is not uncommon for an old mother-mother to be driven out by her son, and forced to bend her. There is a known case when, near Verkhoyansk in winter, in a field, an old woman froze, who was not received by her rich son-in-law. Such is the old age of a Yakut, ending her hard long-suffering life. If you remember that from. from the cradle to the grave, she is crushed by humiliation before a man and that they are diligently cultivating uncomplaining obedience and obedience, then it will become clear how difficult it was even for individual gifted and strong women to break out of this vicious circle. In the general mass, this state of affairs makes the Yakut woman a humiliated, downtrodden creature, very weak, in comparison with a man, mentally developed, timid and modest, humbly enduring ridicule and beatings. “They won’t beat them without guilt,” said one Yakut woman in response to stories about the oppression of wives by their husbands. And even if there were individual representatives who tried to form a protest 'against cruel treatment, for example, by the husband or his family, neither public opinion nor customary law left them any opportunity for this. There was no divorce as such. The clan, as a general rule, gave the escaped wife back to her husband. And the only obstacle to the complete arbitrariness of the husband's power was the ridicule that showered the husband if his wife fled. Only fear of these ridicule held back the husband in cases when he met a protest from his wife or an attempt to somewhat defend the independence of his forced life: and he tried not to cross the borders beyond which the escape began. But only a very few could decide on such an escape. And the vast majority of Yakut women carried out their work and accepted their position without any attempts to resist. To consolidate this servitude, the usual rule imposed a number of economic restrictions on women. As a rule, the woman did not receive a land plot. In case of marriage, the daughter was deprived of the right to inherit after her parents or relatives of the old family. Not only brothers, but uncles, nephews, and even distant male relatives which line were then heirs. There is a known case when relatives received the inheritance due to the absence of relatives of the deceased, and his own sister, who married into another family, received nothing. If the father, for example, bequeathed or transferred part of the property of a married daughter to another clan during her lifetime, processes and litigations began, which very rarely ended in her favor. Likewise, the share of unmarried daughters in the inheritance was very insignificant compared to male heirs. From this side, the Yakut custom generally sought not to give a woman independent material support, thereby emphasizing her dependent subordinate position and strengthening her lack of rights. We followed here the usual picture of the life of an average Yakut. Of course, there were deviations to the sides due to material well-being or an unusual course of life. So, for example, the wives of rich Yakuts had the opportunity to shift the whole burden of work onto farm laborers or farm laborers, exploited with all the ruthlessness of the kulak ideology. Likewise, the position of the wife of a poor man, who is often forced to be hired to work with the whole family, has been exacerbated many times by oppression by the owners. In the same way, the position of the Yakut woman was terribly burdened if she did not marry. In this case, not to mention the fact that her parents tried to squeeze the kalym out of her with their work, she was doomed to terrible and consistent exploitation by brothers, nephews or uncles, who took the place of the head of the family, and severe oppression by their wives. A powerless, wordless worker — she found no protection anywhere and in anyone. That is why the Yakut woman sought to get married, and even a knowingly cruel husband preferred to live in her own family without the hope of an early marriage. It should be noted that despite this, extramarital affairs are quite common among the Yakuts, and do not cause those feelings of social contempt and alienation at all. what other peoples have. This is probably caused by the desire to have as many children as possible and by that fact; that the appearance of children, under whatever circumstances it occurs, is always a joy in the house. In any case, it is not uncommon for a Yakut to marry with a child. In the same way, the Yakuts easily look at the ties that arise among families. Not to mention men, to whom family morality does not present any requirements in this respect and does not impose any prohibitions, even the Yakuts treat the relationships of a married woman quite simply. "If a wife sees a man, when the husband is not in the yurt of TyuNizTdTu5G, there are three people" or "is there a tree on which the bird would not sit?" (in the sense of "is there a woman who would not have a lover?") - ironically, Yakut sayings are stated. In those cases) when, for example, an extramarital affair leads to the birth of children who, for some reason, were not from the relationship with her husband, even the latter looks at this relationship through his fingers. In general, everyday life, as it were, sanctifies all kinds of sexual intercourse, since their result is the birth of a child, and is condescending towards others, condemning only infertility in a married couple and almost always blaming a woman for this. ("If there are no children, the woman is to blame"). Likewise, the relationship of unmarried women, which is widely tied at public celebrations, weddings, or summer jobs, is also applied. Parents, however, scold the ilts punish their daughter, whose behavior threatens to deprive them of their "kalym", but if the hope of marrying her is lost, or if the kalym has been paid, and the daughter still lives with her parents after the wedding, they remove all worries about her "morality" ". An “illegal” child brought by a daughter is accepted into the family on an equal basis with “legal” ones, enjoys the same rights, care and love with them. “An illegal child is still better than not having a child” —so | the voice of public opinion. It is clear that under this situation and the conditions with which the marriage of the Yakut woman is furnished, extramarital affairs are widely spread among the Yakuts. The fact is that giving in marriage, as a general rule, was carried out without wishes and often even in addition to the consent of the girl, very often in complete dependence on the size of the proposed "kalym". Love, sexual attraction - ^ especially in women - found application and developed mainly outside of marriage. Coming back to the question of changes in a woman's life under the influence! economic conditions, it is necessary, as we indicated above, to take into account fluctuations in the direction of improvement and in the direction of deterioration in the position of women. These fluctuations concern not so much the social and social situation as, mainly, changes in the housing and everyday life and in the quantity and quality of work it does. Wealthy Yakuts usually live either in Russian-type huts, or in more spacious yurts, built separately from the khotons. In accordance with the abundance of livestock and, in general, the larger size of the farm, the family has one or more workers, often a whole family of farm laborers, due to which the responsibilities of the hostess also change. Its task is not so much 'household work as a general observation, the distribution of work among workers. Naturally, all the work, and of course the most difficult, is shifted to the backs of the mercilessly exploited poor. A large amount of free time, a certain independence and a habit of managing workers, in accordance with an increase in material well-being, also raise her cultural level, alas, due to the greater oppression, cruel and harsh exploitation of the worker. The latter finds itself in appalling conditions. As a general rule, she lives in a khoton, in a dirty robe that has decayed on her, often in only cowhide, among incredible dirt, exhausted by hard work. And the richer the fist, the more such workers he has. Often whole families live in a khoton. Many of them are the "pupils" of the owner, still children "taken into foster care", that is, simply bought from some poor man. This purchase is very beneficial to the kulak, because when he receives an employee "for education" he does not conclude any employment contract with him and loads him with free work at the expense of "family" relations, which are expressed exclusively in his unlimited power over him. Sometimes, however, very rarely, there are energetic, intelligent women who manage the entire household with a weak and pliable husband who easily obeys the authority of his wife, recalcitrant daughters who marry by their own choice, or widows who run an independent household. As a general rule, a Yakut woman is belittled, submissive to the power and will of her husband, accustomed to looking at herself as a creature of a lower order, works, gives birth and dies meekly, and is joyful if the husband, due to his natural qualities, is kind and condescending to her: upbringing, traditions, family and clan, economic situation and working conditions prepared her for a difficult life and did not give any opportunity to start the struggle for family, social, economic and cultural emancipation. This opportunity was born only with the Soviet regime.