2. Life and everyday life of a Mari woman before the revolution
The pre-revolutionary way of life of the Mari, which, as we see, largely persists to this day, creates a number of features in the position of a Mari woman. Mariyka has long been accustomed to hard work, which she performs on a par with a man. She works as much as he does in the field, and she also helps him in forestry work. She also bears the brunt of the homework. As in the distant past, when the Mari, fighting for their land with their neighbors, or hunting in wide-scattered forests, often left home for whole weeks, so now he often goes to forest trades. In such cases, the entire household is left to the woman. And the Mari woman, no worse than a man, learned how to manage him and do all kinds of work. This, however, does not lead to an improvement in her position and the man does not consider her to be his equal. She is only f {his slave, obliged to do the job. The man is the head of the family and he controls everything. Therefore — learning is useless for a woman — she does not manage money affairs — and rarely leaves her village. She must be a good housewife and needlewoman. The consequence of this is that 93% of Mariek are illiterate. The life of a Mari is both unsightly and uncomplicated. She follows the paths determined by custom, to deviate from which is considered the greatest crime. Most often, in a small, low and smoky hut, with a dirty floor, without any decoration, only with simple bunks, a Mari girl is born with the help of a midwife's grandmother, who to this day continues to enjoy great authority in the Mari village. The child receives a teat from a rag with chewed bread, and is entrusted with the supervision of older children, and often grows up without any supervision. A large percentage of children. (In such antihygienic conditions, without sufficient care, they die in infancy. For those who remain alive, working life begins from early childhood — study, but not at school. From 6-7 years of age Mariyka is still quite a child, she begins to learn sewing, as the most necessary occupation. In addition, she helps her mother with household chores and babysitting her younger children. ; but this is not the point, but the evil that it brings. This evil is so great that its influence affects the whole life of the Mari. Trachoma, a disease so common among the Mari, is more common among women and girls, moreover in a stronger and a more neglected form than men. Likewise, many women, not being old, suffer from blindness. The study continues for almost 10 years - until the time when the girl becomes a bride. bot requiring careful finishing of the smallest parts. Embroidery, which seems so original on Mari shirts, towels, fabrics belts and women's headdresses, often consisting of double, complex embroidery, not only takes away a significant part of her working life, but also destroys her health. A Mari woman should spend at least a day on embroidery of one men's shirt, other things sometimes require even more time. All kinds of handicrafts (stringing beads and hanging coins, weaving belts, etc.) turn out to be just as long and painstaking work. In total, a Mari woman spends almost half of her working life on preparing clothes, so all the work, from processing flax or hemp to sewing, lies with her. That is why in the upbringing of a Mari girl, training in needlework and making clothes is central. “He doesn't even know handicrafts” is the worst comment about a Mari girl. As a bride, she is less valued if she is a poor needlewoman. Long before the wedding, she begins to prepare all kinds of good - to embroider hats, towels, women's and men's shirts. These things are intended to give gifts to relatives and family members of her future husband, during and after the wedding. Happier and richer brides are considered to have prepared more of this good. A matchmaker or a matchmaker praises such a bride to the groom and his relatives: “clever, meek, needlewoman, embroiderer, has so many shirts, so many towels, so many shimaksh” (headdresses). Wedding songs glorify such girls: "achazhdechat mastar, abazhdechat mastar" - that is, in her skill she surpassed both her father and mother. In wedding ceremonies, the remnants of the old way of life, when the woman was completely enslaved, are still preserved. The girl's consent was not needed at all to marry her off. This consent was given for her by her father, who received a kalym (ransom) for her. The custom of kalym, as well as bride kidnapping, is preserved in some places to this day. Abduction does not exempt from the ransom, but only diminishes it and simplifies wedding ceremonies. It is interesting to note the pagan wedding ceremonies that prevailed in the past, and to some extent persist to our time. The marriage took place among the pagan Mari in the courtyard or in the open air, near the tent set up for this. A table with a loaf of bread was set near her, beetroot beer, salt and lighted candles. The priest led the bride and groom to the table and read wedding prayers, asking the spirits to send them happiness and love. During this prayer, those present bow to the ground. At the end of the ceremony, the matchmaker led the young woman into the tent, and putting a woman's headdress on her head, took her back. Then the feast began. As for the divorce, then it was done simply according to the old customs. For this, 6 witnesses were needed, and the divorce was considered completed after a series of ceremonies. In the songs of the Mari, echoes of the past are vividly preserved, when the Tatars abducted the Mariek. The Tatars, apparently, contributed to the spread of the custom of bigamy and polygamy in general among a part of the Mari. However, this did not become any widespread custom. We see that from early childhood the Mari woman is regarded as a worker, her strength and skill are valued in her. The ability to run a household, to embroider, etc. — all this does not require, according to the concept of Mari-men, that a woman should go to school. All matters for which knowledge is required are done by a man. This view was established over time and turned into a custom against which the woman did not try to object until the October Revolution. On the contrary, the Mari mother herself denied the benefits of enlightenment, and did not send her daughters to school, thinking that since she had lived a century without literacy, her daughter and him would live. In addition, they were afraid that the "learned" girls would not obey the demands of their parents well. Ignorance was and still is the main negative fact in the life of a Mari woman. It, in turn, supports the superstitions that are so characteristic of the Mari. There was even a saying about their superstition: "Mari's job is to conjure and whisper." The woman takes an active part in these whispers and witchcraft. Although communication with spirits according to the concept of mari should be performed by the eldest man in the family, often a woman, without waiting for him to perform the rituals. In such cases, she puts on her husband's hat and, as it were, transfers to herself the right to communicate with spirits. In general, this once again emphasizes the humiliated position of a woman who is unworthy of communion with spirits. There were even rituals in which women were forbidden, but all the more she needed to be afraid of all these spirits and load them up. Therefore, sorcerers and sorceresses, taking advantage of the darkness and ignorance of the Mari, easily deceived her. This is how the work and duties of the Mari are distributed, taking all of her time. Always almost busy with work, she ceases to notice the oppressive environment that reigns around her, supported by economic backwardness, ignorance and superstition. And instead of fighting her, she supports her. The humiliation of the Mari in the family, in addition to the fact that the old customs make her disenfranchised in the sense of allocating property, etc., is also characterized by a number of harmful customs. A number of them, understandable in the conditions of life that the Mari led in ancient times, are completely unnecessary and harmful now. Especially harmful are the customs that do not allow a married woman to show her bare legs and bare head in front of her elders. Their preservation entails disastrous consequences for health. Mari hair, braided tightly in braids and wrapped gathered in one place, on the crown of the head, temples or on the forehead, is covered with a heavy headdress. From the constant wearing of this headdress, hair, deprived of access to air, splits. In places where the headdress (shimaksh) is strengthened, bald patches are formed, and some parts of the head, for example, the front part, when worn. 1. Mountain Mariiks for combing flax. Shimaksha on the crown of their heads remain constantly open, from which they are exposed to frequent diseases. Nopu are all the time shod in black woolen onuchi, they also undergo diseases and become unnaturally thin. It is quite natural that under such conditions of life, there could be no question of the participation of a Mari woman in public life, at least in the most modest sizes. The external life that took place behind the 4 walls of the hut was of little concern to her; only from rumors (manege) and gossip she drew her awareness of the outside world. These rumors, connected with prejudice, condemned the slightest deviation from custom and strengthened everything old. Mariika before the revolution is a support of superstition and is fanatically religious. She raised her children in the same spirit. Mariyka supplied sorcerers, fortune tellers and clairvoyants from her ranks, only as an exception, professional healers were men. These sorcerers, who knew the Mari woman, her customs, easily found their way into her thoughts and into her pocket. Life among the harsh forests, perhaps, even more reflected on the woman than on the man. In this regard, it is interesting to note the Mari folk art, which surpasses the creativity of neighboring nationalities in its level. We have already said how much time a Mari woman devotes to embroidering and decorating various things. In this work, a forest always stands before us, the harsh poetry of which is closest to the Mari life. With a simple geometric ornament, with a few but expressive tones, the Marika conveys the rich content of nature and makes it often see the inclinations of genuine creativity. This creativity, even in those unbearably difficult conditions that surrounded the Mari woman for centuries, she managed to preserve and bring it to our time. What did the Mari woman give those few hours of leisure, which, although rare, were encountered in her life? Here, too, we encounter deeply ingrained habits to which free time is given. If this is a girl, then she goes to gatherings, or games, which most often do not bring her anything useful and good. On the contrary, gatherings sometimes turn into carriers of infectious diseases and not particularly moral habits, as a result of the desire to spend a "good" youth, in anticipation of a difficult married life, although it must be said that the Mari condemn extramarital sex and the birth of illegitimate children. Adults usually turn a blind eye to the harmful aspects of these customs, because they know from themselves that only in their youth there is time for a Mari to have fun, to live “well”. The old way of life does not give anything that could replace them. With marriage, this entertainment ends, and this is the only entertainment that is available to the Mari, and instead of gatherings, the Mari woman while away leisure time with her neighbors, reinforcing her superstition here. In manezh-rumors, she gives her soul and grief to the woman who dares to do something reprehensible from the point of view of the Mari village. All her bones will be washed, and when she appears on the street, various whispers will rush after her. It should be noted, at the same time, the exceptional isolation of the Mari. As she did not try to protest against the old customs, she was also not used to turning anywhere for protection. In addition, pre-revolutionary laws and authorities did little to protect her from a number of difficult customs and powerless position. And if the Mari men nevertheless sometimes tried to protest against their oppression and were considered freedom-loving, then the woman had only to observe it from the outside. Thus, despite the fact that at work, at home and in the field, a Mari woman is not inferior to a man, and often works even more than him, she was never recognized as a full member of society or family. She had to obey her husband unquestioningly, and follow the customs of antiquity, often harmful and humiliating. In the same way, a Mari girl had to completely obey her father, and even when she got married, she should not be guided by her desires, following the orders of older men. was considered as a worker, as a bought and sold labor force. During her life in the family, as they said, her dependence on her elders, the need to obey them, were also emphasized in every possible way. These are the few words that describe the life of a Mari woman before the revolution. One should not forget the picture of this everyday life, in many parts of it persisting even now, when one has to get acquainted with the work to emancipate the Mari, which has been done in these few years after the revolution. We must not forget all the complexity of work in such an environment, when it meets everywhere with terrible economic and domestic backwardness, only by extortion of which we can say that the task is completed. However, the awakening of activity in the Mari, the awakening of its social class consciousness, this work is largely already done. We will try to consider it on the following pages.