2. Pre-revolutionary life of a Votyachka
Unlike the women of neighboring nationalities, the Votyachka enjoyed great freedom even before the revolution in some relations. The remnants of that stage of development when a woman occupies a dominant position in society (matriarchy) is here. But, along with this, there is a lot of negative in her life, and even the most partial freedom is most often used not in a good way. The position of a girl is more free than that of a married woman. In terms of work, the votyachka does not lag behind the man: she mows, manages a harrow, a plow, etc. In the field, she works on a par with him. At home, she has more to do than him. The whole household is in her hands. The man almost does not interfere in her area here. In the hands of the votyachka, money is kept for various household purchases, and she is, as it were, the treasurer of the family. The husband rarely does anything without first consulting his wife. “The whole house is courted by a woman,” says the Votyak, and tries to live peacefully with his wife. He almost never hits her, because, in his own words, "you beat your wife - you beat yourself." Under such conditions, the woman actually plays the role of head of the house. She is also a family doctor. However, in spite of this freedom, the majority of the Votyachki continue to remain ignorant, and until 9O <Yo they are illiterate. This percentage — higher than the percentage of illiteracy among Russian women in the region — speaks for their undoubted backwardness. A woman, according to a man, has no time to learn. If we trace the life of a votyachka from childhood, we will understand this view. Already from the age of 7, the girl begins to be valued as a working unit in the household: she helps her mother in her numerous work around the house, garden, etc. As a result, most often the girl-witch is left without any education and gets used to her whole little! leisure to give to parties and gatherings. The father, who is strict and demanding of her with regard to work and marriage at his discretion, gives her complete freedom while she is in girls. She can leave and return from the party at any time of the night — in the summer it is all the more convenient for her because she lives in her “to-e-nose” (barn) — completely independently from the rest of the family. Starting from 12-14 years old, girls spend all their free time walking around gatherings, which continue from early Autumn to spring, and in summer, at parties and round dances. Sometimes a hut is rented for gatherings for the whole season. Guys also come to the gatherings. There, they first play and hang out, and then, about 12 hours, put out the fire and go to bed side by side. These gatherings are often centers of sexual promiscuity and entail a wide spread of syphilis and other diseases. But despite these harmful consequences, the gatherings are firmly rooted in everyday life. If a girl does not walk on them, they laugh at her, do not give a pass, even deny the right to marriage. Votyachka-girl early begins to live a sex life, and premarital sexual intercourse is not considered reprehensible. On the contrary, the more guys a girl has, the higher she is valued and the more suitors she has. True, recently it has become in some places considered shameful to have a child before marriage. But earlier, and even now in many localities, it was considered, on the contrary, a good sign, and the birth of a girl's child was met with joy in the family — such a girl began to be appreciated more. Such customs, which were quite natural in the old days, now, with changes in living conditions, lead to the most undesirable consequences: sexual promiscuity, etc. Thus, the fact that a woman used to enjoy considerable freedom among the Votyaks did not change. ... 1. Women's holiday in the vot village. She was in the best position, and in her ignorance she did not lag behind the oppressed and enslaved women of other nationalities. The Votyak girl with her own hands helps to spread the negative feelings of the Votyak village, since, for example, it is her responsibility to cook "kumyshka". Young people are no less addicted to this drink, and when a girl needs to treat her friends, she starts cooking kumyshka. It is not forbidden for her to do household chores, and she enjoys complete freedom in "alcohol affairs". Along with the guys, she takes part in various games and amusements (horse races, festivities with rituals, etc.). To participate in these festivities, a girl can take a horse, etc., and the elders do not take offense at this. But now comes the end of this free girlhood, during which many girls are crippled physically and morally, 'where it is difficult, in sexual relations, for example, to draw the line between the voluntary and the imposed. A married woman remembers her girlhood, appreciates it most of all for festivities, this especially stays in her memory the proverb: "Odig hole shulan holes", 'that is, “Once in my life there is only a period of partying” —is used by votyachki when they remember their youth. We have already said that it is customary among the Votyaks to give their daughters in adulthood (25 years old), and to marry their sons young (16-17 years old). When they decide to marry a son, they come to the bride's house or give birth they ate and said: “Now we are old people, we have a big farm, our son is still young, there is no one to rely on. There are no employees. Would you give the girl if she were our mistress. " The remnants of the old Votyak wedding customs survived only as an accidental element. These include traces of purchase and theft. The purchase is remembered in the votyatsky song: 1 “It would be good 'this time, When we go to the bazaar,' Silk fabrics were selling cheaply. It would be good 'in those years, When we begin to marry, Girls became cheap.' Now, although the father has the power to force the girl into marriage, he rarely exercises this right. Previously, the girl is asked about her consent, after which they play a wedding. Even if abductions exist, it is only with the consent of the bride, otherwise the latter still leaves the groom. In the case of caring for her, as a rule, they are not chased and not particularly condemned, although divorce is condemned. If the father does not agree to marry off his daughter for a person she likes, then she herself goes to him, taking away all her property in addition. The fact is that, although according to Votyak customs, a woman does not at all have the right to the property of the entire household, but a part of the products made by her — wool, canvas, etc. — are considered at her disposal. Likewise, livestock in most cases is considered a woman's property. Each girl receives livestock from her parents or relatives as a dowry (foals, calves, etc.), which she brings to the groom's house, and then passes on to her children or relatives. The destruction and sale of these livestock is condemned by the Votiaks and is allowed only in the most extreme cases. These are again echoes of the time when a woman was the head of the family, and the entire household was considered her property. The property of a Votach woman creates to a large extent her legal status in the family. If she has more livestock, then she gets more food and is more respected. If she has little of it, then, accordingly, the share of milk, butter, meat, eggs, etc. given to her is reduced accordingly. Having women usually exploit the poor. It must be said that in a large Votyak family there is a queue to cook in the kitchen. The advantages of having more livestock are that they get more days of duty - two days in a row, and the poor must be content with one day. Since every woman derives significant benefit from this, consuming part of the products for treating relatives and treating her children, the benefits of such a double watch become clear. It even happens that a woman is completely deprived of this privilege, and in this case, she must be content with handouts from her elders. Young women — daughters-in-law who have little property most often find themselves in this situation. This circumstance often serves as a source of quarrels and sometimes even leads to divisions. But let us return to the girl-witch. So, she gets married, and this ends her free youth, so often remembered by her. As soon as she enters her husband's house, she must leave her former licentiousness and become a faithful wife, otherwise the custom, which looked so favorably upon her girlhood, would severely condemn her. Even at the surviving “women's holidays”, which speak for the fact that once a woman enjoyed no less freedom than a girl in sex life, her husband vigilantly looks after her. On these festivals, which take place in the early days of Lent, women gather and revel alone or together with men. Obviously, earlier on these holidays a woman was given the freedom to choose the man she liked. Even at the present time, sometimes there are connections with other people's men on these holidays, but the husband, if he is not completely drunk, watches over his wife and tries to prevent this. The work life of a votyachka contains many responsibilities. We have already said that in the field she works on an equal basis with a man. In addition to caring for livestock and a vegetable garden, she is responsible for preparing clothes for her household and some close relatives. All the work, from breaking flax to sewing clothes from canvas, lies with her. Washing clothes is also a woman's responsibility. Despite the poverty, the votyachka knows how to cook everything that is needed, and even somehow she always has various supplies, scraps, etc., which she carefully collects and stores. But the diligence of the Votyachka woman does not rid her of dirt and uncleanliness. For example, she does not wash linen with soap, but simply pounds it in a mortar. The same dirt continues to remain in the votyak hut. Thus, by the nature and size of its work, the votyachka, naturally, was always attached to the hut; she did not participate in village meetings. Among the male Votyaks, it was generally accepted that a woman was not suitable for participation in public work and, therefore, could not claim it. Since her position in the family made her a family doctor, she had to know all sorts of beliefs and remedies to help with this or that disease. Due to this, she often had to turn to village sorcerers and "abyz". This taught her to believe only the latter, converting to ask them for help, which, of course, aggravated her ignorance. If a Votyak man is gullible and superstitious — he is afraid of evil spirits and tries to maintain good relations with good ones — then the Votyachka in this respect was even darker. That is why she did not understand that there was a benefit if she gave up teaching her children, and preferred to keep them at home. With an undoubtedly good position in the family, a votyachka has no right to divorce. This right remains entirely with the man, who can separate from his wife at will. In the Votyak language, this is still called: "expulsion of the wife" ("kyshno ulyan"). In the event of such exile, she cannot even claim a share of the common 'property or complain about her husband. In the old days, divorce was carried out by the village assembly, but a woman rarely had the courage to raise such issues. She also did not know how to apply for protection in court. The Votyaks are accustomed to value their custom more than court. But at the same time, the Votyaks are extremely caring, for example, towards a pregnant woman. They release her two weeks before giving birth from heavy field and housework. During childbirth and for some time afterwards, she enjoys the care and care of her family and even neighbors. But this does not save her from having to give birth in a dirty room with the help of an ignorant village midwife, whom she used to trust more than a midwife. All other diseases are treated at home. Illness is sent by an evil spirit, and in order to be cured, you need to get rid of it. To get an idea of ​​the methods of treatment, we will give a means of curing a child from the so-called "dog old age" ("pune kyl"). In the process of illness, the child greatly loses weight, his body becomes dark, his arms and legs cease to function. Such a child is thrown in the place where the dog was lying, then, together with the shaky, they are placed in a hot oven, after the bread has been taken out of it, the dog is forced to jump over the sick child: if the sick child is male, the male dog jumps, and if girl, - the female jumps. Then they put the child in a dog kennel for a few minutes. If a child develops fungi, that is, abscesses on the tongue, due to the unclean 'content of the oral cavity, then he is treated' by taking fungi growing on the walls of the cellar, rinsing them in water and giving the child this water; sometimes they also put a cat's tail in his mouth. Under such conditions, it is difficult to expect the normal development of the child. Votyaks respect their ancestors very much and try to escort the deceased to the next world as best as possible. Women take an active part in the performance of such superstitious customs. In some places, for example, there is a custom at the funeral of an infant, before lowering it into the ground, to breastfeed the dead infant for the last time — squeezing milk from the breast into his mouth three times. If the votyachka for some reason cannot take the child to the cemetery, then she performs this rite at home, during parting. In the same way, the next day after the commemoration, after the so-called "hangover dinner" ("makmyr shyt") - in order to please their ancestors, women and old women dress up as during Christmas time, and ride through the streets on sticks to the upper at the ends of which bells are tied, they laugh like a horse, and if they see any stranger on the street, they grab him and, leaving their sticks, forcibly begin to ride him until he can fight them off. A young woman who is married must 'appease her ancestors. For this, there are special commemorations called "yyrpyd eeton" ("giving up the head and legs"). They are performed by young women in the first or second year of their marriage. For this purpose, a horse or a bull is usually slaughtered in the husband's house, the head and legs of which are taken by the wives with their husbands to the house from which they married. Here they bake pancakes on the first day, and in the evening the next day the Varangians brought them, which is eaten by the invited relatives and neighbors. These commemorations are distinguished by the fact that those present at them sing wedding songs. Then they harness several sledges with bells (commemoration takes place in winter); bones from the sedenny are put into a basket and late in the evening with wedding songs, they are taken to the field. These commemorations are arranged so that the deceased relatives do not get angry and do not take revenge on the newlyweds for not inviting them to the wedding, as well as in gratitude for their patronage. All of the above allows you to form a whole idea of ​​the situation of a Votyak woman from separate pieces of everyday life. Despite a number of advantages that she enjoys, her life cannot be called easy. Maybe that's why she drinks kumyshka on a par with a man and, moreover, does not even get drunk. By doing as much as a man, if not more, she is just as strong and her habits are in many ways similar to those of men. She is only more ignorant, prejudices and superstitions are more ingrained in her. She is not used to complaining about her life and not everyone agrees to tell her. Only in pesias does she, like a male Votyak, lay out all her thoughts, her hard, working life. She sings: We don't sing, we don't tell do not come a heavy grief; We do not complain, we do not cry, Until there is a great disappointment. When sorrow and suffering come, Then we sing, shedding tears ... Shedding tears is what else! —Then (we) sing, telling everything that lies on the heart. Votyachka did not know funny songs; after continuous work, only bitter songs escaped her: 1Ah, mother, mother, I have a lot of grief — Why did she give birth to me in suffering? Ah, mother, mother, my voice is very beautiful— Why didn't she teach me to sing? All these conditions, not seeing any way out, a votyachka in girlhood sometimes uses her freedom so incontinently — after all, there is a whole life ahead without the slightest glimmer of this freedom. After all, no one told her that it was possible to live differently and that she had the right to do so. And while at work, embroidering "aishon" or making yarn, she sings her song. The work of the Votyaks is unique and multifaceted, and the woman takes a great part in this work. She sings about everything that meets her in life, that deeply touches her. Votyaks are generally inexhaustible in the choice of themes for their songs. It is not for nothing that the Russians put down a proverb about them: "Votyak sings everything: walking in the forest — he sings about the forest, walking in the field — about the p-bet field”. “They give a girl in marriage, and she composes her songs for her friends. The last time her friends gather to her in a close circle, and the girl for the last time says and sings everything that she needs to convey or say. " In her songs, the votyachka shows herself to us as an impressionable, talented, capable of wonderful creativity. But the whole environment of the old way of life that we have outlined forced her not to develop these abilities, but, on the contrary, to drown them. And a lot still needs to be done to destroy all these negative features of her life and give vent to all the abilities inherent in the votyachka.