3. Life of a Kalmyk woman
In the economy of a Kalmyk nomad cattle breeder, a woman takes the first place. She cooks food, lays a felt mat (felt, which is used to cover the wagon), makes leather, sews shoes, dresses and brings up, of course, in her own way, children. The duties that lie on a Kalmyk woman are many times harder and more difficult than the work of a man who is almost a whole spends the day away from home. Long before sunrise, a Kalmyk woman rises and goes to milk the cows and unload the cattle in the field and to work. Imperceptibly. the hour of "uruni" - breakfast, to which the women should prepare their food; by this time the men and the rest of the family are up. The elder pours tea into a sacrificial cup or puts a piece of prepared food into it and places it in front of the burkhan; then he drinks tea himself, followed by others; when the food is seden, the children eat what is put before the burkhan. After breakfast, the teenagers go to the cattle, the men go to work and then saddle horses, go on the side on business; otherwise they sit in the wagons and smoke pipes. At this time, women prepare dung (fuel from cattle dung mixed with earth). Before lunch, they also brew vodka (arka), sew and repair clothes, spin, make ropes, etc. After dinner, women and girls, taking “uchi ”(Leather bags), go to the steppe to collect dry argasun for fuel and return, by the time the cattle arrives, for evening milking. The rest of the time is spent folding the fuel brought in for the winter to dry. Men usually sleep after dinner, and there comes the evening watering time. In the evening, along with the cattle, the adolescents return from the field and only then the whole family gathers. In winter, women sit more with the children in wagons, but the man's responsibility is to take care of the cattle wandering in the steppe, to clear the place of snow for the camels to spend the night, etc. Thus, the Kalmyk khoton lives day after day until the migration, which brings some revival to the monotonous life. The eldest in a Kalmyk family is a father or husband. He unquestioningly disposes not only of all property, but also of all members of the family. The woman, despite the fact that she occupies the main position in the economy, is given extremely little attention. She is a workforce created exclusively to serve the male half of the family. Bought as a wife for a kalym (khyurm), the size of which varies depending on the well-being of the groom's parents and her own, a Kalmyk woman in a new family often lives much worse than a dog from a bad owner. She should not call her older relatives by name. She is obliged to get up at the entrance to the wagon and the departure of the elders, and she herself must leave the wagon backwards. Even those words whose capital letters match the capital letters of the names and surnames of older relatives, the daughter-in-law must pronounce in a different voice than she usually speaks. She is forbidden in the wagon of older relatives to take off her headdress and shoes, drink from a cup of elders and even eat in their presence. A woman, especially a young daughter-in-law, does not have the right to be the first to speak to a man even of her family. Unbeknownst to her husband, she cannot act or independently resolve any issues about the household that she leads. Moreover, without the permission of her husband, she has no right to answer questions from strangers. And the Kalmyk woman is so downtrodden and intimidated that even now, despite the great work done in the steppe to emancipate a woman, quite often there are cases when a woman stubbornly keeps silent about the questions: "what is her name" or "how to get to such and such point ". She does this not out of fear of a stranger, but only because her husband forbade talking to strangers. "If the elder brother dies, his wife's inheritance, if the horse dies, his skin inheritance" (in Kalmyk: "Ah ukkula bergi cheres, act of biting sairi cheres ") - this is the main Kalmyk proverb reflecting the position of women in the family. It was bought for kalym, which was collected by the whole family, so it is the property of the family. And after the death of her husband, she does not leave this family, but goes to wife to the next brother. Usually a Kalmyk woman wears a red or blue long-sleeved robe on a weekday. sleeves, made of different colors except yellow; further - "tsegdyk" - a long sleeveless jacket, and, finally, - "labshik" or "birze" - a kind of robe made of colored fabric with wide long sleeves, worn over the tsegdyk. Tsegdyk and terlik are worn only by married women, while girls also wear labshiks, but they also have their own special costume. A Kalmyk girl, over a kilik (underwear), also wears beshmet (bizet), like a man, but only much longer: he almost closes his boots; on the chest it is tightly closed with a row of buttons. On the head women wear hats: a tomshu — a round cap in a kind of Tatar skullcap with a black band and a yellow top. Decorations, both on hats and on clothes, consist of patterns sewn from cords and laces, less often embroideries with gold iron. The drawing is unpretentious and most often reflects the situation of the steppe. Married women wear two braids, the ends of which are hidden in covers (shibirlik), while to their braids are often braided, for greater length, horse mane hair. At the ends, they wear metal or silver cones called "tokan". Usually a married woman wears two scarves in a special way on both sides of the dress, while the girl has one scarf, on the left side, at the waist. A Kalmyk woman must necessarily be the mother of a large family. If the Kalmyk woman does not have children or only girls are born, the husband has the right to demand a divorce, and the wife must return to her parents. The birth of children, especially boys, is an outstanding event in the life of a family and is always accompanied by a number of established customs and rituals from the earliest times. Only after the birth of a child does a woman become a real family member. Of course, there is no need to say that the Kalmyks give birth in the most antihygienic conditions. Usually, they give birth in a wagon, on a dirty floor, with the help of all kinds of healers and old women. A Kalmyk woman rarely goes to give birth to a hospital, because the law of ancestors prescribes to give birth to a child only under the roof of her husband. During childbirth, according to custom, men should not be in the wagon. If childbirth is difficult and prolonged, then, after using any manipulations such as shaking, artificial stretching and squeezing the abdomen of the parturient woman, they invite the gelung to read the prayers appointed for such a case. When the child is born, without washing, they wrap him in something soft and so leave Until the day that zurhachi - will indicate how happy, usually not earlier than the 3rd day. If a son is born, then one of the women finds the father, takes off his hat and takes him to the wagon, which lets him know about the birth of his son. The hat needs to be redeemed and the father prepares a treat for the women present at the birth. On the day and even at the hour of birth, the father cuts the ram and sacrifices it, that is, performs "kgalqgin", as in marriage, which is done for the happiness and life of the child. On birthday, usually, parents arrange a feast for relatives and neighbors, but without dancing and songs, there are also no youth. On the appointed zurhachi happy day, the child is washed along with the rags in which he was wrapped after birth. After the umbilical cord has fallen away from the child, usually on the 5-6th day, a zurkhachi is invited to the newborn to indicate his fate and assign a name. National and religious names in the genus Zrdni (treasure), Ubushi (monk), Ochir (rod), Bedma (lily), Basang '(Venus), etc. are given more often only to the first son and, in exceptional cases, to a daughter. The next children are already named after the tracts, rivers, lakes where they were born. If children die in a family, then names of a different type are given, more often animals. Kalmyks believe that the mortality of children comes from the action of evil spirits, and in order to mislead them, children are given names of animals and others, for example, Noha (dog), Chon (wolf), Me-kle (frog), Mukebun (ugly boy) and others. Sometimes it is impossible to enter a wagon where there is a newborn at all: they are afraid that they will not jinx him. And if someone has to see that the black carpet of the wagon is down, then you must first ask permission to enter. Another means to save children is to dedicate them to a khurul (monastery) called manzhiks. The birth of only the first son, sometimes other sons, is celebrated with special triumph, while the birth of a daughter, with the exception of perhaps the first one, is generally not particularly pleasing to the parents. Therefore, only with the first-born, all ceremonies are observed, with the rest they do without zurkhachi, and the parents themselves give the child a name. Immediately after childbirth, the parent is given cold water to drink, and on the very first day she gets up and starts working. Her food, if possible, is improved. From the very first days, the child is fed with lamb fat. The babies are swaddled quite tightly, tied to a board.When the child is already so old that it can hold on to its little hands, the mother carries it under her shoulder, as if riding on her right side, so that one of the baby's legs is in front, and the other is behind the mother's right side , and the little hands cling to either the shoulder or just! for the clothes of the mother who holds the Ero with her right hand. Thanks to this carrying of children, their legs are bent; This, according to the Kalmyks, makes them good riders, while a good and caring attitude towards a boy is paid much less attention to a girl. This is overtaken by those that the son is a continuation of the offspring of the father, he is also the future owner. From the first days of her existence, the girl experiences all the hardships and deprivations associated with her gender. Barely covered with sheepskins in winter and deprived of any dress in summer, she first frolics and runs under the gusty snowstorms, then under the burning rays of the summer steppe sun, driving rams into the hot; but then, growing up, he gradually begins to help the mother to milk the sheep and mares, wearing leather cribs with milk; he picks up the wool of the rams whose parents are working on shearing, cooks dung, the bridge of the cauldrons together with the women, looks after the younger brothers and sisters, cleans the wagon, and in his free time he does sewing. It is usually not accepted to teach girls to read and write.When the girl turns 13-14 years old, and the boy 15, the parents send messengers for the closest relatives and invite the Gelungoa. After prayer, the son or daughter is introduced into the wagon of older relatives from the mother's side and subjected to the rite of cutting off the temples there: the so-called original hair, which has never been touched by scissors, is cut off. After this ceremony, the girl turns into a maiden. She tighter and tighter pulls her jacket (about | which 'see below), dresses in a beshmet; now everyone pays attention to her. She is a bride. From this time on, parents begin to think about marriage. For the Kadmyks, marriage is a duty and care, parents, while the young play only a passive role. Usually the groom's parents are the first to go in search of the bride. The bride's parents are just waiting or learning about the neighboring women. Parents find brides themselves, which they announce to their sons; they do the same with their daughter. And here the main thing is the will of the father, although without the consent of the mother, the marriage still cannot take place. When choosing a bride, attention is paid to her wealth and beauty, her temper and reputation of her parents, and the heads, arr., To working abilities: physical strength , the ability to sew, weave, housekeeping. The wife, in the words of the Kalmyk, is a godsend! That is why every family tries to marry the boy as soon as possible and keep the girl from marrying for a longer time, as a labor force. Before the Soviet regime, there was no age for marriage or marriage established by law, religion or custom. Usually married — a man at 19, and a girl at 15. However, in questions about years, the year of birth always had, and now it still matters, the year of birth, since, in addition to coming of age, marriages cannot, in the interests of family happiness, take place when a girl is 16 or 19 years old, and a man is 25, 37, 49, etc. every 12 years, counting the summer not from the day of birth, but from the day of conception. When parents want to marry their son, they turn to “zurkhachi” (astrodog) to indicate whether such and such years can be married son, what age should you look for a bride and when and under what conditions it is most useful to start a matchmaking. In addition to these indications, as well as the interests of economic and estate, it is necessary to keep in mind also kinship. For marriage, only the kinship of the male line is important, but on the female line it does not have an obligatory value. The process of matchmaking and marriage among Kalmyks of different clans and uluses is, in general, the same, but some rituals are performed differently. Derbet Kalmyks happens in this order. The groom's parents equip the elderly! relative, good! knowing national customs, with one; "Side" arches to the parents of the intended bride. The messenger never speaks directly about the purpose of the visit, but in the midst of the conversation, one way or another, he lets you know about the real reason for the visit. If the owners of the kibitka do not accept, under any pretext, the arca brought by the guest, then the wedding will stop there. If vodka is accepted and drunk, it is a good sign, and the matchmaking can be continued. Then the groom's parents again send matchmakers, who this time, in addition to vodka, carry a white scarf with a silver coin, glue or sugar tied into it. Clay is a symbol of the continuity of the union, and silver is a symbol of happiness and wealth. The handkerchief is given to the mother; the girl then becomes a bride. This is where the matchmaking ends. The interval between matchmaking and marriage ceremonies is long; the day of the first ceremony is appointed by the same "zurkhachi". On the appointed day, the groom himself goes to the bride with close relatives and friends. This trip is called "the bridegroom's bride". The groom's train carries at least a bucket of vodka, one boiled ram, tea, candy, etc., depending on the state, and again a white scarf for the bride. Before entering the wagon, the guests are checked all the gifts brought, and special attention is paid to the fact that the boiled ram contains all the suitable parts: the lack of one of them may cause a refusal or a delay. Next, the bride is taken. All the same zurkhachi determines the day of the groom's departure for the 'bride, the summer of the man who must first touch the bride when she is taken, the summer of the man who takes her on the horse, the color of the horse, and the color of the bride's outerwear. For the sake of the accuracy of the fulfillment of all the instructions of the zurkhachi, which is associated with the happiness of the future family, he usually accompanies the train himself. The bride's parents have been informed of all the instructions of the latter. Upon the arrival of the groom with friends to the bride, a feast is arranged. At the moment of taking the bride sits on the family bed, surrounded by girls, crying and wailing. The person appointed by the zurkhachi approaches her first, the girls attack him and beat him, but his friends are in a hurry to rescue him, they grab the bride, amid the general commotion, take her out of the wagon, quickly put her on the prepared horse, and the whole train of the groom hurriedly leaves. After the well-known rituals, in the elders' wagon, from the side of the groom, he performs the rite of throwing fat into the fire of the hearth. Then there is a ceremony of tearing the skin of a wedding ram: the skin of a slaughtered bar on stretching over the threshold with the wool down so that half remains in the kibiTka, and the other outside it. The guests of the bride take the outer piece of skin, and after the groom, the inner one and begin to pull each group towards themselves. The tug ends when one side either rips the skin off the other, or the skin rips. A happier outcome is recognized if the groom's side overpowers.In the groom's wagon, the zurkhachi and gelungs perform a religious rite consisting in reading prayers. At the end, all the men leave, and the women comb the bride's hair like a woman's into two braids and hang a “sheberlik”; from that moment on, a woman should no longer show her open head to strangers. Then all the guests leave. Among the Kalmyks of the Torgutov tribe, not only relatives and acquaintances, but also the groom's parents usually participate in matchmaking. In the first three days, a young woman leaves the wagon only under a blanket. Only on the 4th day, when all the guests leave, she goes without a blanket to the wagon of her new parents and starts working there. The Kalmyks' wedding expenses are significant and it takes a lot of time to complete the entire wedding ritual. Usually the wedding 'ceremony lasts from six months to a year, and sometimes two to three years. Of course, it lasts longer for the poor than for the rich, since in a short period of time it is difficult to acquire all the things required by the rituals. However, at this time, the predominance of economic (at first over the rituals) affected the wedding. of the whole ceremony, for which they either combine several ritual acts into one or, which happens more often, throw them out altogether. The poor now do without any rituals. There are cases when the spouses, wishing to avoid any expenses and rituals, agree to kidnap the bride themselves Having passed, after marriage, to a new clan, a woman is recognized here as a relative only as long as the family exists; after the death of her husband, if he died without leaving children, or after a divorce, the wife returns to her parents. If the wife dies without having given birth to children, half of the dowry is returned to her parents, and half is donated to the khurul (monastery). If there are children left after the death of his wife, then sometimes the husband passes on the family For her family, no more than 1/3 of the wagon inventory from the one brought by her, but nothing from the cattle-breeding economy. During the life of the wife, she does not have separate property, and when the family is divided, when the son is separated, a part is allocated to the mother, equal to the filial, but less, than my father. The same division occurs during divorce. Divorces among Kalmyks were relatively easy, especially for a husband: infertility of a wife, mortality of children, an incurable illness of a wife, if the onset of the illness was before marriage, a quarrelsome character, family misfortunes — all this could serve as a legitimate reason, so that the husband would send his wife to her parents. The issue of divorce is resolved by the family, and only the dispute about property forces us to turn to the bakshi, the lama or the authorities. On the contrary, the divorce at the request of the wife took place only under pressure from the bakshi and the lama, and there must be any reasons for this. In case of a voluntary divorce, the wife receives either all or half of the dowry from the wagon inventory, and from the livestock only what he will give (the husband. But if the husband drives the wife away, he must return all the dowry she brought. When the wife herself does not want to live with her husband, nothing is given to her from the household. If the wife runs away from her husband, then) she is returned by force and presented to the court bakshi or. lama and if, by the court of the latter, the husband is found guilty, then! the wife is allowed to leave him and marry another; otherwise, the wife is forced to live with her husband. Such families are placed under the supervision of neighbors for three years. If during this period the husband behaves well, the wife is obliged to live with him. If the divorce was due to childlessness or other serious reasons, then both, after a divorce, can enter into new marriages, in other cases, only the husband does not lose the right to marry.In case of divorce, children remain with the father, and if he turns out to be the culprit in the breakup of the family, the mother can take the children, but she loses the right to leave again Married. Popular views encourage only divorces due to childlessness. With children, there are almost no divorces. Childlessness is sometimes, however, extremely rare even among the rich, is eliminated by polygamy. By religion, the number of wives is not limited; the popular view does not fully recognize polygamy, which is evident from the proverb : “The first wife is from God, the second is from people, and the third is from the devil.” The facts of bigamy in recent years are almost never met at all.