2. Life and life of Chuvash women before the revolution
The life of a Chuvash woman in an environment of pre-revolutionary life is very difficult. And although the work to emancipate the working Chuvash woman naturally could not yet touch all aspects of everyday life, it did not destroy many still existing abnormalities and prejudices generated by the economic enslavement of the Chuvash in tsarist Russia, nevertheless, the work done in this regard is extremely great. Only a comparison of the old way of life of a Chuvash woman, with all its negative features, with the current situation, can give a picture of the achievements of this work. In difficult conditions of material need, standing on the border of impoverishment, in an atmosphere of cultural backwardness, oppression and darkness, a Chuvashka was born. From an early age, the child is surrounded by this environment, which does not allow him to develop normally. Even at the present time, in comparatively better material conditions, with a greater development of education and health care, the mortality rate of Chuvash infants is quite high. Growing up in such an environment, a Chuvashka, already in childhood, must take on the burden of everyday domestic work, helping her mother. She also has to learn embroidery and needlework. ' This painstaking work not only takes away her best years, instead of filling them with school, but also contributes to the widespread spread of eye disease (trachoma). As soon as the girl grows up, she acquires a new concern — to babysit the rest, the younger children. Only on rare occasions is a girl sent to school; in most cases, it is believed that she does not need it at all. A man who is in charge of everything, money and in general all complicated matters, needs some more education, and a woman must do exclusively housework. Chuvashka has long been accustomed to working on an equal footing with a man, both in the field and in other jobs. It even left its mark on her appearance. So, the Chuvashka spends all his childhood at home, getting used to working from childhood. By the time she grows up and becomes a bride, she already knows how to manage the house, went through the long science of embroidery, became (a good needlewoman. If she possesses these basic qualities of a Chuvash girl, then she is considered a good bride. However, family members often hesitate to marry her off) Not so long ago, it was a fairly widespread custom for boys to marry 15-16 years old, and girls to marry for 25 years. This is partly due to the fact that the girl is valued in the family as a labor force and therefore they try to keep her longer. On the other hand, the groom's family is exactly the same expects to get him as a wife a good strong worker in the prime of his life.In the old days, when the custom of paying the bride's ransom (kalym) was in full force (parents received a higher payment for an adult daughter. Even now this custom is preserved in many places ransom. It is an echo of the old wedding customs that prevailed not so long ago. This custom shows well the dependent position in which you find yourself Chuvashka was playing. In this respect, she can be compared with the women of the eastern countries. In the same way, she did not have the opportunity to decide on her own marriage. Here the will of the father was sacred to the whole; he could ask about her desire, but it was not necessary at all. ' Only recently have parents begun to listen to the voice of their daughters. However, before marriage, girls have the opportunity to date guys and here they often find suitors. For this, there are special autumn and winter Figs. 1. Chuvashki at work. Girls' holidays, where girls and boys get to know each other. They, of course, did not give her anything useful ', being most often carriers of infectious diseases, superstition and ignorance. These holidays are furnished with various ceremonies and rituals, songs, games. Girls are considered; they are stewards and the guys are treated. Here they play their favorite game - stripes. This game consists in the fact that a whole bunch of stripes is distributed from the ends into the hands of the players - the couple who have the ends of one stripe must kiss. Various musical instruments, so beloved by the Chuvash, are also present at these evenings. Guys who go to these parties are trying to look out for themselves a suitable cry. Girls, in turn, try to attract guys, since the Chuvash have a belief that every girl must get married. If she does not marry, she will have to be the wife of an evil spirit in the next world and wash his linen. As soon as the bride is spotted, matchmaking begins — buying a bride. About the role of buying a bride in Chuvash life is sung in one old Chuvash song: “Once I sent a matchmaker, matchmaker, From the first time I did not go, did not go. I also sent a matchmaker, didn’t go again. I took it and sold it to a Tatar; A Tatar has money like dirt, And we have like chips, like chips. ”These few and stingy words perfectly convey the state of a poor man when he does not have enough money to buy a bride. It is interesting to trace the wedding ceremonies of the Chuvash, characteristic of the old way of life, because they express a very pronounced view of a woman as a forced creature, subordinate entirely to the elder in the family, a man. The matchmaker comes to the bride's family and stands under the mother with a belt whip in her hands and asks if the parents agree to give their daughter for such and such. After consulting each other and talking with the daughter, which takes several days, the answer is given, and if it is positive, various preparations are made for the wedding. They agree on the ransom amount, which can be from 3 to 100 rubles. depending on the wealth of the groom and the merits of the bride. There were weddings and “abduction” —by kidnapping of brides, but this did not get rid of the ransom, but only reduced it. After a series of ceremonies and celebrations, a wedding day is set. Before him, the groom is walking off his bachelor time, and the bride mourns her girlhood. On the wedding day, the groom comes to the bride with a whole train, from where they go to church. The bride is riding. When leaving the outskirts, the groom drives up to the bride and, throwing open the veil, looks into her face. Then he strikes her three times with a whip (or whip). He does this only to show her that he will look into her eyes, that is, love her, but for disobedience he will strictly exact from her, and as a lord and master will beat her. Thus, this ceremony also emphasizes the role of a man in the family as a ruler and a woman as a more submissive being. The same continues in the daily life of the Chuvash after. her marriage. It cannot be said that the Chuvash men treated women badly. On the contrary, they are very good family men, they often live without quarrels and even consult their wives in many cases. But a number of customs, which once constituted the only laws for the Chuvash village, continue to weigh on a woman even after her marriage. She is revered by them as an unclean being; so she cannot appear in front of older men without covering her hair and legs. Because of this, Chuvash women often have poorly developed legs, since they constantly keep them shod in thick onuchi, as well as baldness, from the constant wearing of a headdress. Having become a married woman, the Chuvashka also bears the brunt of household chores and, in addition, works on an equal footing with a man in the field. IN; depending on the ability to work, she enjoys more or less respect. Only sometimes did the customs develop in her favor. So, for example, according to Chuvash customs, it was not considered shameful to have illegitimate children, and in property rights (the right of inheritance, etc.) they were equated to legal ones. Also, divorce was not considered reprehensible. On the contrary, he was considered a fairly common occurrence, and his ceremony itself is not complicated, but interesting nonetheless. The divorced turned to the eldest of the clan and, if he considered it possible, after getting acquainted with the case, to separate them, then this was done as follows: the divorced husband and wife were put together, tied with a sash; one of the elders of the family cut this sash, that is, performed the rite of releasing them from any obligations in relation to each other. After that, the divorce was considered complete and the divorced had to bathe in the river, as if to wash off everything related to their life together. Swimming in the river, they said: "As the banks of the river never converge, so we would not converge." It is necessary to mention some more customs, which, most likely, were borrowed by the Chuvash from the Tatars. So, for example, among the Chuvash pagans, polygamy was allowed. But the latter did not receive any wide distribution before, and now it occurs only in exceptional cases. Another custom allowed a young, childless widow to marry the brother of the deceased. k Chuvashka Didn't try to protest against these customs before the revolution; she considered them unshakable and absolutely necessary. We saw that the Chuvash's childhood does not give her at least a crumb of knowledge necessary to protect herself from ignorance and superstition. Therefore, the Chuvashka was (and is still to a considerable extent now) the main stronghold of old customs and all kinds of prejudices. Not knowing the very benefits of education, she believed that she did not need to send girls to school. They must learn the same thing that their mother learned, that is, homework, embroidery and needlework. And since the economic situation did not improve before the revolution, her children continued to grow up in the same oppressive material and living conditions as herself. In every misfortune, in every difficult case, the Chuvashka turned to sorcerers and witches. Superstition among men is much less developed, and there are almost no male healers. 'Only a woman, downtrodden and illiterate, considered a witch and a sorceress to be her highest authority. At the birth of a child, a Chuvash woman does not turn to a midwife (and they are not always there), but uses the services of village midwives, who, in the words of the Chuvash health department, use "the most barbaric manipulations" - throwing pots on the belly of a pregnant woman in order to cause turning the child, hanging women, pulling the child out of the woman's belly with rusty hooks from the lamp, etc. It is impossible to describe all these tricks and crimes, as a result of which an uncultured Chuvash peasant woman is crippled and dies from the horrendous work of village attendants. This also leads to high infant mortality. Thus, the life of a Chuvash woman from birth to death passed within the four walls of an unpretentious hut, first under the authority of her parents, and then her husband. If the Chuvashka had some leisure after her hard, daily work, she spent it in gossip and gossip with her neighbors, since nothing better could be thought of. Of course, she did not take any part in the social life of the village. In this respect, she sharply differed from the Chuvash men. The latter always strive for knowledge and, despite the extremely difficult situation before the revolution, they have nominated a significant number of teachers, doctors and other workers from their midst. And outside school, a man could enrich his knowledge. Many men went to work, to work outlets, where they often learned a lot of interesting and new things. For a woman, such paths were closed, and men very rarely spoke to them about anything not related to household chores. Priests, healers, midwives — all of them took advantage of the downtrodden position of a Chuvashka and benefited from it. If there was no way out for a Chuvash woman in real life, then she sought consolation in religion, in observing various rituals, etc. Slowly from her husband, she carried the last crumbs of her meager wealth to the priests and healers. For this they "consoled" her. Therefore, before the revolution, the Chuvashka was religious, sometimes to the point of fanaticism, and strove to educate her children in the same spirit.It should be noted that one more main character trait of the Chuvashka developed especially due to all these conditions. This is her mistrust and secrecy, which so hindered and hinder her work among the Chuvash. She can no longer believe that someone 'unselfishly wishes her well. But if you win her trust, then she rejects this isolation. And, despite her downtroddenness, the Chuvashka has a lot of creativeness in herself. This can be seen at least in the adornments of her national costume, which she so stubbornly continues to adhere to (no more than 2-3% of women do not wear a national costume). It has already been said how much time the Chuvashka spends on embroidery and needlework. They are very valuable in their beauty and originality. Chuvashka can be proud that in the past her costume had a great influence on the costumes of neighboring peoples (Mari and others, although at present this outdated and unhygienic costume has become a great evil for her.) In such difficult conditions, in addition, deepened by a number of natural disasters, the first years of the revolution, work was to begin to emancipate the Chuvashka "appay" (that is, the aunts, as the Russians mockingly called her.