4. The position of a Tajik woman before the October Revolution.
So, Islam has left its heavy centuries-old imprint on the entire life of a Tajik woman, who, however, enjoys much greater freedom in the mountains than in the city. Here they do not wrap her up in various robes and bedspreads, do not imprison her from the gaze of strangers in a cramped and stuffy room, as is usually observed among the sanctimonious bourgeois population of cities. In a mountain village, a woman wears a veil '(chishban) only for the parade, on holidays and especially solemn occasions, and at normal times she walks without any veil, moreover, communication with men is not considered such a shame here as in the city. You can often see a group of women sitting at the hut together with men, between whom there is a lively conversation, laughter and jokes are heard. So comparatively open! the life of a Tajik woman sometimes allows her to marry, not only at the behest of her father, but also at her own request. This is the only and enormous advantage of a Tajik woman, which she had in the past and has not lost now, unlike the lives of other Muslim women. Marriage among Tajiks occurs very early, as elsewhere in general in the East. The girl is given in marriage from the age of 12 to> 25 years of age, after which; she already has a chance; for marriage does not. Having looked at the bride for himself, the groom sends her matchmaker, his mother or sister to her parents, who from afar starts talking about marriage, and if consent to such follows, a discussion of the question of "kalym" begins, that is, redemption of the groom for the bride. Thus, the dowry is prepared here not only by the bride, but also by the groom. Usually, part of the bride's dowry is made by her father, and most of it is supplied by the groom. In total, it consists of the following items: shirts - 10-15 pcs., Trousers - 10-15 pcs., Scarves - 10-15 pcs., Robes - 5-10 pcs., Blankets - 2-3 pcs., Pillows - 2-4 pcs. Then, there are various decorations and so on. little things, only about 200-300 rubles. Very often the dowry includes various livestock, dishes, a gun, etc. Kalym is made up of one or more horses, cows, rams, a varied amount of mats, shirts, wheat, etc. A deadline for paying the kalym is set and the wedding takes place on the same day. The groom comes to the bride's house with the mullah and the village foreman. Mulla reads a series of prayers after. which, having inquired about the consent to the marriage of the bride and groom, reveals whom he married. This usually ends the marriage ceremony. After the ceremony, the bride goes to the groom's house, and in the bride's house there are treats and all kinds of entertainment, moreover, women usually gather in a room separate from men. The next day, in the case of the bride's innocence, she is congratulated and covered with all sorts of tenderness, otherwise, a divorce is required and only occasionally the wife stays with her husband, being hateful for him for life. It is interesting to note another, no less important, event in the life of a Tajik woman - the birth of a child and that extraordinary attitude towards children among Tajiks in general, which is known to everyone who came into contact with them. Children for the native woman of Tajikistan are considered a great reward for her entire working life. So looks; almost every Tajik woman loves her children. Love for her child and the desire to have him are so great that when a woman is pregnant, she secretly goes to the mullah and asks him to do all sorts of spells to ensure a safe childbirth and health of the child. True, this happens in cases where children of a Tajik woman die. The birth of a child occurs in this way. Before giving birth, a Tajik woman says goodbye to all her relatives and remains in a separate room alone with her grandmother. Sometimes one or two older women are present. When the last labor pains begin, the woman is placed at a stool on which she rests with her hands and in this position gives birth to a child. It is believed that if a child appears screaming, then he will be happy throughout his life. After giving birth, the newborn is wrapped in a piece of soft "mat" and placed in a homemade rocking chair, and the woman in labor is placed in bed. To strengthen her strength, they give her lard or melted butter to drink and during the first days no one is allowed to see her. Caring for a child is the most important task for a Tajik woman, for which she sacrifices all her strength. She will never agree, a woman will leave her child even at home in the hands of strangers. During work, she drags the cradle with her newborn everywhere with her. It should be noted that childbirth for a Tajik woman generally takes place in very difficult and sometimes unsanitary conditions. After marriage, a relatively carefree life for a woman ends and a difficult existence begins in slavery with her husband. This life is not fun and monotonous. Where seclusion exists, it is extremely slow and monotonous. Day after day, there is nowhere to rush, there is nothing new and good to expect from tomorrow. They get up, as a rule, early ', because of the cattle. We need to milk the cows and drive the cattle into the herd. Women are engaged in this, and girls collect dung and make dung from it. There is little firebox in Tajikistan, and therefore manure is collected not only from the yard, but also from the roadways, where girls are sent for it. In winter, manure is not removed from the cattle, but left in place, sprinkled with straw or dry foliage. After the cattle are harvested, cakes (kuturma) are baked and this is the whole family breakfast. The husband goes to work in the field, where he spends almost the whole day. The women stay at home alone and do all sorts of household chores: chinning old clothes, sewing new ones, embroidering, spinning, weaving, etc. The work is usually done very slowly, and even slower if a neighbor or relative comes. For the guest, cakes and tea are served, where there is one, and the time is spent B) various chatter and gossip, and they do not leave work. They usually come to pass the time under the pretext of asking something about the housework, but disappear from a friend for several hours. But this is not considered "visiting". The whole family comes to visit, with children and work, sitting until> evening, so that the hostess can prepare some kind of treat for the guests. The winter time is somewhat more varied than the summer one, because it is the time of weddings and relaxation from field work. Annual holidays are also significant gaps in the gloomy life of a Tajik woman. It should be noted that for a man these are working days, but for a woman the most free and free time. On the eve of such holidays, a Tajik woman washes her head, braids finely braids, and on the day of the holiday greases her eyebrows (with soot or black paint), and, dressed in variegated clothes, goes to where the tambourine sounds, namely: in winter to one of the houses of the village, and in summer , most often, to its outskirts. The celebration lasts 2-3 days. Songs, dances, jokes, bragging about outfits entertain a Tajik woman for a while from her boring everyday life, IO 'most of all the holiday pleases a Tajik woman by the fact that on this day she is allowed some freedom by custom, so they have fun for a long time, as if wishing to make fuller use of Fleeting freedom ... On such holidays, the groom can see his bride, hiding somewhere behind a bush or building and bribing one of the women with sweets, which will push the unsuspecting bride into a common dance. In addition to annual holidays, Tajik women also have fun during spring gatherings of various herbs. Such fees also turn into real holidays associated with appropriate costumes and pastime. Regarding female labor in the general household of the family, it must be said that it is very significant. It is difficult to determine what percentage of this is the work of a Tajik woman, but in any case, a lot of it falls to her share. A Tajik woman cooks food, spins, sews, weaves, embroiders, runs all dairy and livestock farming 'and helps her husband in the garden or vegetable garden. The female population of high-mountain villages, living in conditions much freer than the population of low-lying areas, is employed and in other types of work that are completely beyond the reach of a plain woman Here, Tojichka widely uses her labor in field farming and cattle breeding. She threshes and blows bread, collects grain and straw, and sometimes carries on shepherd's duties. When warm days come, women unite in an artel, gather their cattle and drive them to pastures, where they build themselves large huts for the summer and stay there with their children until autumn. Freedom here also affects the fact that in some places the custom has been preserved, according to which men are not allowed into such shepherd colonies, as long as they are in the field. (In general, in Tajikistan, the role of women in the economy is limited and determined by the rules of Islam, according to which she not all work is allowed, namely, it is forbidden to work in public, so that she cannot run into a stranger. This rule, as I see, is not always observed, especially where the influence of Islam is weakened. Nevertheless, thanks to this centuries-old To the influence of Islam, the activity of a Tajik woman has generally spilled over into the forms of housework, the most common of which are the following: 1) Spinning cotton kata on a spinning wheel. Almost every woman knows how to spin, and in every home you can see a spinning wheel, which is sometimes purchased as a wedding gift, and sometimes just bought. Quite often girls who collect for their dowry or poor single women take this work to order, and their daily earnings in such cases usually reach 20-30 kopecks. 2) The next, very widespread craft is weaving mats, i.e. e. coarse white cotton fabric, which is the most common in the household of a Tajik woman and is used for shirts, wide trousers, children's clothes, as well as blankets, robes, etc. This craft is practiced in the most primitive form, which has been inherited by Tajiks for many centuries. 3} Processing of paper yarn. The threads are wound on the same spinning wheel into skeins and boiled in water, after which they are dried and painted in different colors. Paints are most often used locally, and have : black, from a decoction of pomegranate peel and brown, from a decoction of cotton shells. Imported, aniline (red and blue) are also used, but this is not observed everywhere. After dyeing, the threads are crimson, by soaking them in a liquid diluted solution of flour, dried and wound on special spools for a loom.! 4) The weaving is made on a very simple loom, which is made by a joiner, usually in the same area. This occupation is very difficult in itself, which is complicated by the fact that the threads are produced fragile and often break. The weavers work, as usual, on the fresh; air, sitting on the ground and dangling his legs into a specially dug hole. The fabric is measured with a special measure of length called "gas" and is equal to 4 yards. If the work is not done for oneself, then a payment is charged for it in the amount of 4-5 gases from every 20 gases of the tissue, or in money, at the market value of the due amount of matter, which is usually equal to Gr. 50 kopecks, 5) Small farms about. Each house has at least one cow, and quite often several, but not much milk is collected. If a cow gives 5 bottles a day, she is considered good. In view of this, milk is mainly used for personal consumption, moreover, butter is rarely made, and sour cream is used more, from which the Tajik woman prepares her favorite national dishes "tarpukh" and "cool". 6) Wool processing. In view of the fact that each farm has a significant number of small ruminants, the Tajik hostess collects a sufficient supply of wool, from which coarse threads are spun and the ropes necessary in every farm are twisted. Good lamb's wool is used for woolen fabrics, and goat's wool is used for coarser items like ropes and other household items. Lamb wool is spun, like cotton wool, on a spinning wheel, and the threads are also dyed in various colors. If the work is in a hurry, then the yarn is often distributed to friends and relatives, who spin it completely free of charge, for the sake of helping their fellow villager. In addition to the listed types of women's craft, embroidery is also very common. This occupation is developed because it is required for any dowry. They embroider with multi-colored silk and paper threads, and the patterns are made by special specialists in this business, who often have high skill, who are invited to the house; where the fabrics are embroidered. Embroidery of Tajik women is known for its beautiful designs and subtlety of execution. The participation of Tajik women in field work is not very significant. The man plows, sows and reaps, but in the gardens and orchards, women carry most of the work. The man makes the beds, and the woman is responsible for planting seeds, watering, weeding and selling the crop. In the garden, she cuts grapes, removes apples, apricots and dries them for the winter. Drying of fruits is usually done on the roof. -, It still remains to say a few words about poultry farming. Oddly enough, perhaps, but it is very poorly developed. There are not many chickens here, and eggs are considered more of a delicacy than an ordinary product. The care of the chickens is very careless “, they are hardly fed, they are always expelled to pasture. Most of the girls look after the bird on the farm.! All products of women's labor go to the family's personal consumption. Despite the fact that weaving is very developed in places, "bazaars never see enough handicraft fabrics. Exactly the same is the case with other crafts. This is explained by the fact that the village is generally very little involved in the country's economic turnover. Therefore, the products of female labor are regarded extremely low. Thus, the position of a Tajik woman, mainly urban, was entirely determined by the Koran, Sharia and custom. She was a kind of movable property of her husband. At the wedding, the husband, as it were, bought himself a life partner, and became a complete master of her.According to the law of Islam, a girl has no right to an independent choice of her husband and parents, often, having married their daughter as an infant, marry her completely 'regardless of' her personal desire. Yes, this is impossible from the point of view of prevailing customs. In the city, choosing a husband is considered a shame and therefore the girl is most afraid of how they did not think of her that she was "choosing a husband for herself." Every man can divorce his wife without any difficulty, it is clear to her that she is divorced, whereas it is almost impossible for a woman to divorce her husband, since this requires the consent of her husband according to the law, and, according to custom, a large ransom for the latter. Often the husband demands an unbearable ransom and the wife, unable to pay it, is often forced into a shameful, bitter life full of all sorts of insults. However, the most powerful factors in the enslavement of a woman are the following. 1) No mother is the guardian of her children. In case of divorce, the children are not given to her. .This rule is based on religious and everyday traditions. Nothing is harder for a mother than to part with a baby, accepting into account, moreover, the extraordinary love of the Tajiks for children), therefore, no matter how bad a woman's life may be, she is unable to leave her husband. This custom is one of the most cruel methods of enslavement. 2) An equally important condition for the domestic enslavement of women is also the right to polygamy among men. It must be said that this custom is more widespread in cities, but it is occasionally found in villages, among the wealthier population. Where there are two or more wives, there is always the most beloved and therefore there cannot be peace. The husband 'always supports this latter in every possible way and remains incredibly rude towards the other, often beating her and relegating her to the position of a domestic slave. 3) Finally, another factor in the enslavement of women is the custom of marrying minors. The normal age for a girl to marry is 14-15 years. Very often a girl is wooed when she is born and is married off to a pre-puberty. If we add to this the girl’s complete powerlessness in deciding the issue of marriage, it becomes obvious how terrible her situation is under such barbaric laws and customs. There are times when a woman loses the strength to endure in the future all the oppression of her lawlessness and decides to commit suicide. Then she goes to the mountains, climbs a steep slope, covers her face with a veil and throws herself down into an abyss or into a bubbling river. These factors of age-old enslavement of a Tajik woman are the main reasons for her cultural backwardness, which is so. it is difficult to wage a struggle between the Soviet government and the Communist Party.