3. Transcaucasian Kurdish woman before Sovietization
The Transcaucasian Kurdish woman is completely immersed in the heavy duties of servicing the household and family. Usually wives and children carry out a number of heavy household chores: loading packs, carrying water, milking cattle, collecting fuel and everywhere carrying babies tied on their backs with a wide belt. Women do not hide their faces, in the crowd they stand interspersed with men and participate on an equal basis with them in the life of their community. In the absence of her husband in the village, the hostess receives the visitor. The Kurds do not have seclusion, like the neighboring Turks. If a Kurdish woman is distinguished by intelligence or beauty, - her name is added to the name of her son and some Bapita-Shashan - carries; everywhere the name of his mother is Shashan. The freer position of a Kurdish woman favorably distinguishes her from a Turkic woman who is downtrodden and hidden from the eyes of strangers. This circumstance greatly facilitates the work among women to involve them in Soviet construction and local councils. Women wear a shirt made of chintz or red fabric. The women's caftan is no different from the men's; he is girded with a shawl or other cloth. On festive days or during a wedding, the Kurdish woman wears a wide, front-cut "talma" made of red cloth over the caftan and decorated with silk ribbons and laces. In addition, she wears a wide, long apron. The girls sew a fez into the headdress, into its upper part, and thread a wooden hoop into it so tightly that a round platform is formed above it, pins are inserted into this platform in front, on which they put red beads. In addition to the headdress, women wear jewelry: necklaces made of beads, earrings, rings, and sometimes "mehik" are small round silver jewelry that is inserted into the nose from the outside, on the right side. In Turkish Kurdish women, it is replaced by a silver ring, from which there is a chain, attached either behind the ear or at the shoulder. There are coins hanging on the chain, and all members of the family, of course, obey the father, as the head of the family. In relation to his wife, he is her complete master. She has no right to do anything without his will; the husband has the right to inflict severe beatings on her, and in case of betrayal, the popular custom gives him the right to cut off her nose and ears. The Transcaucasian Kurds did not have such barbarism, only the expression was preserved in the language: “the nose and ears are cut off,” which testifies that such a reprisal once took place. The power of the father over the children is as strong as over the wife. However, infanticide is despised by everyone. The father even has the right to dispose of the middle of the daughter; he can give her out for an expensive ransom for a person whom she does not love. The father has the right to dissolve the daughter's marriage, but only when, after marriage, one of her relatives kills her husband's relative or vice versa, since the relationship between enemies is prohibited by custom (if the relatives reconcile, the marriage is not dissolved) ; secondly, the father can dissolve the marriage when the son-in-law offends the wife for no reason. This operation is profitable for the father, since he returns to the husband only a part of the dowry received for his daughter and gets the opportunity to marry her a second time and receive a new ransom. In general, when she marries, the daughter is freed from the direct dependence of the father. Popular custom does not give the mother significant family authority; on the contrary, after the death of her husband, she even becomes in some dependent position on her son; in general, the mother has only a moral influence on the children. Under the guidance of the mother, daughter and daughter-in-law, they spin and knit wool, do all the housework. The husband owns all property, but the wife has separate property, consisting of the offspring of a cow or mare, donated to her by relatives; in fact, the husband, of course, also uses her property. The birth of a child is accompanied by magical rites and superstitious customs among the Kurds. Irises are born in the house on straw laid on an earthen floor. The husband leaves the house at the time of delivery and returns in a day or two. Before giving birth, they turn to the mullah and he writes the talisman "dua" for the welfare of the family. After giving birth, the mullah writes another "dua" for the happiness and well-being of the mother and child. For their labors, the mullah receives a cow, a bull or other cattle. In difficult childbirth, they tear the woman in labor by the ears, shout loudly in her ear, calling to wake up, saying that a brother, a guest has arrived, etc. If the V woman faints, they shoot from guns to bring her to consciousness; sometimes they go to the river and cut with a dagger. water (a magic technique of cutting what binds the woman in labor). According to popular belief, a woman in labor is attacked by a special creature "Hal-anasy". She looks like a terrible woman; Hal-anasy cuts out the heart and lungs of a woman in labor, carries them to the river and washes them in water. If she has time to do this, the woman dies. To drive out the Hal-anases, they shoot the puppies from guns. If children die in the house, they turn to the mullah. He explains that the child died because a woman came to the house with a harmful "dua", but if he is given a cow or a sheep, he will write a "dua" that will destroy the deadly power of harmful "dua" and the children will not die at. The name of the child is given by women. This is an echo of the former matriarchy. The mullahs, who have seized everything from which one can derive benefit, arrogate to themselves the right to choose a name for the child. Mulla rummages in his magic book (the book "Dua-kitaba", or "Jameidavad") and declares that if the child is called not by that name, he will certainly die. And the frightened parents rush to fulfill the demand of the mullah, who receives a reward for advice .Children are breastfed up to 2-3 years. Attitude towards boys I3 Kurdish woman. Caring, even gentle. Attitude towards a girl is worse. If a woman gives birth to girls alone, they look at her with regret, while her family scolds her. To protect children from the evil eye, evil spirits and other misfortunes, talismans are a reliable remedy. Under the cradle of a child, bread is put as such a talisman, which the devils are afraid of. There are children completely hung with such talismans. Ethnographer G. Chursin, in 1924, saw in the village. Molla-Ahmedlu of a one-year-old boy, who hung on his shoulder: a prayer "dua" sewn into a black cloth, a shell, a bead, a metal plaque, and on his back there was a triangular "dua" and several beads strung on colored woolen threads. Since his birthday, pope the idea of ​​the child and his upbringing lies with. responsibilities of the mother. Both boys and girls attend meetings of men and women, where they listen to the conversations of adults. From the age of seven, children are already involved in the household, go after the cattle, etc. From a youthful age, the son grazes his flocks or goes to the shepherds, moreover, he often goes to another tribe. A few years later he returns with his small herd earned by him. Girls from the age of seven have been spinning and weaving wool. On migrations, after dinner, they gather on the river bank or in the shade and, singing songs, spin wool and knit socks. Guys often join them. A woman is morally superior to a man. Kurdish women are distinguished by their loyalty and honesty. Fidelity is seen even in women who do not marry for love; there are almost no prostitutes among Kurdish women. Religion (Mohammedanism) allows a Kurd to marry a lot, but the majority of Kurds do not recognize him, while a Yezidi always has one wife. Only the chiefs of the Kurdish tribes, and the rich, had two wives. Kurds and especially Yezidis always take wives from their kind. For marriage, the Kurds did not have a certain age, usually men married 15 years, and women 10 years. There are two types of marriage known to Kurds: a) through abduction, i.e. when a girl is kidnapped against her will Rhys. 3. Persian Kurds. Or with her consent, but against the wishes of the parents; and b) marriage through purchase (kalym) by mutual consent of both the young and the parents. The Yezidis practice only this last type of marriage. Kidnapping is detrimental. The relatives pursue the kidnapper and kill him where they catch up, the girl is exposed to the same fate if she ran away of her own free will. If the kidnapper fled, then his parents' house was destroyed. The only way to avoid revenge is to surrender under the auspices of a noble person who negotiates with the parents of the kidnapped and for a large ransom they forgive the kidnappers. A peaceful marriage, for a ransom, took place, and even now it is happening in this way: in a house where there is a bride , a matchmaker is sent, who conducts all negotiations; only after their completion, the groom's father comes to the bride's house with bread and salt and turns to her father, in the presence of witnesses, relatives, asks about his consent to the marriage of his daughter with his son. The daughter's father answers in the affirmative, again referring to the witnesses present. Then the parents share the bread and salt, one of the guests gives the mother a silver ring for the bride, and each guest gives the bride a gift according to his condition. After a while, in the bride's house, a feast is arranged, and the bride in poor families usually does not participate in it. This is called the daznigari betrothal rite. From that time on, the young couple made secret night meetings, which in Kurdish are called "dizi e-buke" (bride stealing). A few months later, the groom's father again goes to the bride's house for negotiations. He gives the bride's parents a ransom in money, rams, bulls, depending on the state, and always a horse with a saddle. On the day the "attekirin" final consent is expressed, the groom's father gives the bride's father or brother a gun or revolver and money. The bride brings a dowry consisting of carpets, bedding and other woolen goods, as well as money. If a poor man marries, the whole community collects a ransom for him. At the end of the negotiations, a wedding follows. On the appointed day, all the invited guests gather at the groom; before dinner, women and men dance together. After the dance, the guests go to the bride; if she is from another village, then only close relatives go, and they bring her along with her friends to the groom; the bride's face is usually covered with red cloth. The groom at this time, having bought in a river or a spring, takes part in the guys' game "rakago". With a party of winners, the groom approaches his house, where he is met by girls with with songs. The guests have fun with the groom all day. In the evening, the mullah performs a "kebin" - a marriage ceremony and, having received a gift, leaves. They circle the bride 1-3 times around the hearth and say: "We took you here and you must serve this house until the last minute." A few weeks later, the bride returns to her parents and from there she goes to her own house. The situation of a young daughter-in-law in her husband's house cannot be considered difficult. The young woman enjoys special care and attention until the first birth, all this time she is considered as a guest; after the first birth, she finally becomes part of the family and becomes in a position the same as with other daughters-in-law. It is the responsibility of the younger daughter-in-law to wash the feet of all elders in the house and guests. Like many other eastern peoples, wife and husband do not call each other by name.