2. Life of Mordovia before the revolution
A Mordovian woman in all respects was placed in a worse position than a man or a Russian woman, although it cannot be said that she was in the position of a man's slave. Men are quite attentive to her. In family matters, she always has her own opinion, which is considered, and she has a significant influence on all issues related to family life. The respect of the Mordovians for women is evident in their work. According to their tales, a woman can stop even robbers from committing a crime. A woman in the old days, when pagan beliefs were strong among the Mordovians, could even perform priestly duties. But along with this, such a mass of work piled on her, which did not give her the opportunity to go beyond the 4 walls of her hut. Acad. Shakhmatov in his "Ethnographic collection" gives a very interesting story of the Mordovians of Saratov, province, which perfectly characterizes the position of the Mordovian woman in the old days: “This is how we lived: we will sow hemp and weave bast shoes for women; and then she both knows and trades; Let him not ask anything from us, but give us trousers, shirts, footcloths, mittens, and stockings, and even sheepskin, they will wear us, and we will cut the spring harvest, and she will dress your children, and she will equip your daughter. And the equipment required a lot. As soon as they give birth, they give, when they give birth, they give. That is why they lived in girls. You yourself think, you are a smart person, how much a girl needs to cook, but think about when to cook; for a woman reaps with us all summer, threshes all winter; you cannot thresh during the thaw, she weaves canvas; but think about it, when does she spin? After all, hemp must be cooked: first tug, then rot, then crush, then cut, and only then spin; Yes, do your household chores: heat the stove, feed the chickens and pigs. Then the women lived like this: they did not lie down while spinning, but she would spin, spin and sleep while sitting; the other still has many children; keep up with it. These things were all theirs, and the peasants had a lot of things to do. All winter we carry, and throughout the summer we work in the field. And the young woman who will be married from us will not see her father-in-law barefoot] for three years. And the young woman, until she is born, does not sit down at the table, but eats while standing; He gives everyone a drink, and let him eat. ”Already from this story, which shows us the life of a Mordovian woman in her everyday life, one can conclude how hard this life was. Starting from childhood, she is full of work, and there is no time to think about study or take any part in life outside the walls of the house. Girls, almost as a rule, were not sent to school. The literacy of Mordovians is still much lower than the literacy of Russians and Tartars (in Penza province — 3.6%, in Ulyanovsk — 3.1%, in Samara — 6.9%, etc.). The girl's teaching consisted in helping her mother in domestic and then field work, as well as in teaching the "female craft" - sewing and decorating clothes. Mordovians are very fond of these ornaments, often very complex and requiring a lot of work and art. This is especially true for Erzyan women with their pulagai (back), decorated with fringes and beads. When walking, it makes noise and sways in all directions with its beaded tips. In addition, embroidering shirts, caftans, as well as a headdress (kokoshnik or magpie) —all this is a lot of work on the accessories of a rather complex Mordovian dress. Of course, for a more skillful preparation of jewelry, a rather long training is required, and this is one of the main occupations of a Mordovian girl. She not only needs to prepare clothes and jewelry for her family, but also make a reserve for a dowry (x). If the girl has free time, then she spends it at a kind of "get-together" or on the street. Gatherings even before the present!) I must say that learning needlework now takes up less space than before. time is very common in a number of Mordovian regions, but they are carefully hidden by young people. For such gatherings, they hire or simply find some secluded place, in most cases baths (x), where they spend time in games, courtship, and sometimes less innocent activities. Gatherings are, of course, a significant evil. Young people spend whole evenings (and sometimes nights) in a stuffy and stale air, receiving nothing but the danger of infection. In some places, Mordovians have special girls' holidays (like the Chuvash ones). Girls gather, buy food and feast, sometimes they invite guys too. In the latter case, the purpose of the holiday is to choose future wives and, in general, to introduce young people to each other. But now girlhood ends, and it's time to get married. Previously, this age came later. Girls aged twenty-three and twenty-five were married to boys aged 10-12. There is no doubt that this was caused by a number of conditions, primarily economic ones. The girl was appreciated as a worker and was hired in her prime, while her “husband”, while she worked, ran with the children through the streets. A similar custom was often practiced by landowners. About this so says the Mordovians: “The Archilov peasants did not marry the boys themselves, but they were forced by the master. And the master forced the boys to marry, that's why: a guy, girl, widower or widow cannot be imposed a whole dues, but a rolobrok; and if a guy or a widower gets married, then they put a whole share (work) on them. Therefore, the master married the boys, so that in some places they are called "baths". as many shares as possible would work for him. " On this basis, daughters-in-law developed significantly. At present, this custom has been obsolete, but the memories of it, preserved among the Mordovians, speak of its widespread occurrence in the past. As in all her actions, in choosing a husband, a girl must obey her parents, and only in this case is she considered "decent" ... In the old days, there were cases of a girl being taken away by force, if her parents did not agree to marry her off. There is no kalym (bride price). As an echo of it there is a custom called "masonry". The groom must expose food and gifts to the bride's relatives, as well as a certain amount of money. After the groom has agreed with the parents, the bride is invited, who in turn must agree. Sometimes her persistent refusal is the cause of matchmaking frustration. Thus, the bride's desire is still considered, although her disobedience to her parents is not approved. We have already cited a story about what kind of work awaits a Mordovian married. In addition, she must take care of the fulfillment of a number of customs, which are absolutely necessary for the family to consider her decent and moral. So widespread was the custom that forbade a married woman to go to visit until she marries her son, or gives her daughter in marriage. This further increased her isolation and isolation from the outside world. In the first year of marriage, the young woman eats standing, alone in the closet. In the end, a number of other prejudices formed certain rules that the Mordovian woman adheres to in family life. She must be a mother first of all. It is considered the worst for a woman if she has no children. In such cases, she always goes to the sorcerers, old women, performs various superstitious rituals, if only through this to become capable of birth x) There is also a lot of care with children. You need to look after, teach, and if you fall ill, then heal. In case of illness, they again turn to healers or treat them with the help of their "native" medicine. What this last one is, is evident from the fact that in some places, for example, such methods of treatment were used: if a child has a stomach ache, then they put him upside down, pressing his stomach with a copper cross, read a conspiracy, etc., accustomed to living according to customs and To the prejudices of antiquity, the Mordovian, due to her ignorance, is the main support of superstition. She is responsible for maintaining the veneration of the ancestors. On days dedicated to the commemoration of the dead, at the Mordovian cemetery, which is often located outside the village, you can see many Mordovians who came here to remember the dead with all kinds of food. Crying and lamentations spread far from the cemetery. Older people are walking around — young people, nevertheless, prefer to have more fun and are more willing, for example, to see off the spring. At the birth of a child, the Mordovian first of all turns to the midwife for help. This was facilitated by the small number of hospitals among the Mordovian population in pre-revolutionary times. The backwardness of the Mordovian woman was also reflected in her great inclination towards religious rituals. The priests enjoyed great respect among the Mordovians and — when it was necessary to comfort them, and in other cases to frighten them — forced them to drag various "offerings" for themselves. Considering this perfectly well at the present time, the clergy develops their work mainly among women (and also young people). Recently, in particular in the Saratov and Ulyanovsk provinces, there has been an increase in the sectarian movement — communities of Baptists and Khlyst, again mainly among women and youth. Mordovka's departure to religion naturally follows from the desire to somehow get rid of the difficult life around her. The old living conditions did not give her any other choice. The way to school was closed to her, she did not participate in public life, what could she do? The question of the fight against religious intoxication is now one of the main ones. She instilled in her children the same ignorance and admiration for customs, taking little care of the filth around them. It should also be mentioned that in pre-revolutionary literature, even in scientific works, the belief was widespread that the Mordovian woman was not particularly moral. This is not true. This immorality does not go beyond words. We tried to give a picture of the life of a Mordovian woman in pre-revolutionary times. Already she can give an idea of ​​what tremendous work is required to turn a completely illiterate, infected with age-old prejudices into a fighter in the public arena, a builder of a new way of life. The work is even more difficult due to the sparseness of the Mordovian population and other conditions. And yet, as we will see now, it is being carried out and already has its own successes.