2. Life of Chechens and the position of women before the revolution
The economy and life of the Chechens are somewhat different in two different regions they occupy: in the mountains and on the plane Mountain auls are located along the gorges of the upper reaches of rivers and rivers flowing into the Terek, the centers of which are Sharo-Argun and Shato-Argun, merging together and forming a high-water tributary. Terek-Argun. There are more Chechen villages in this high and rugged mountainous terrain! some of them are located at the confluence of mountain streams, where the gorges expand somewhat and form relatively convenient spaces for construction. Sakli are most often made up of slate stones, almost not fastened with clay, and the back wall rests against the rock; inside the mountain saklya consists of 1–2 semi-dark rooms, with a rammed earth roll, in the middle of which there is a hearth; women try to maintain the fire on the hearth continuously, just as it was supposed to be done in the most ancient times. Above the hearth on a thick iron chain hangs a cauldron in which food is cooked. The hearth and the chain are like the sacred focus of the whole house: the kidnapping of the chain is almost the same as for the murder. Other furnishings of the sakli are extremely poor: a low three-legged table, very low three-legged benches, a faience teapot with cups, earthenware, a few! the peculiar shape of copper vessels, bedding heaped up — that's all; the richer have a separate guest room, "kunatskaya", where only men gather; there the floor is covered with mats or carpets, and sometimes a fireplace is set up. Usually it is cold and dirty in the mountain sakla! and dark. Adjacent to the sakle is a wicker-fenced courtyard, a characteristic feature of which are "sapets" - huge round wicker baskets for storing corn; near the sakli itself, a covered room is set up, where livestock is kept in winter, the main property of the Chechen mountaineer; this cattle is mainly sheep - "baranta", and several cows. But this cattle-breeding economy does not provide a mountaineer even from hunger; average number of his herds | in 50-60 heads gave in the last years before the world war 25-30 rubles. income. It is clear, therefore, that sheep breeding in; mountains quickly fell and the Chechens sought to expand their agriculture, for which they, like air, needed land on the plane. And now Chechen sheep breeding, especially in the mountains, is in a state of decline; one of the serious reasons for this is the terrible death of livestock in 1918 We have already seen how the government of the old regime treated this aspiration of the Chechens. In the mountains, there is very little land suitable for plowing; a more or less suitable site must first be cleared of debris of rocks and stones, folding them along the edges of the selected site in the form of a fence; Then this fence must be turned into a real stone fence, which would protect the future field from talus, from stormy rain streams, and Often the need forced the Chechen women to drag fertile land to a fenced area from somewhere from the bottom of the valley, and very often this land had to be dragged on yourself. When, as a result of these hard labor, the field was ready for sowing, it was slightly plowed with a primitive plow and sown almost exclusively with corn. It is understandable, therefore, that in the mountains an arable plot of 1D - h / tithe cost up to 700 rubles before the war. It is also clear that such conditions did not allow Chechens to get out of those forms of social life backward for millennia that have survived with them, thanks to their isolated life in inaccessible mountains. Above, we have already got acquainted with the tribal structure of the Chechens, with the "Mustugulla" disposition that determines their social relations, the right of bloody revenge. Now let's see how their life developed before the revolution, what place a Chechen woman occupied in this life. Chechens, like all almost the peoples of the East, religion is one of the most important components of everyday life; Chechens, like most of the Caucasian highlanders, are Muslims. But they became Muslims relatively recently — 200 years ago; therefore this religion has not penetrated so deeply, so to speak, into the flesh and blood of their life, As is the case with most other Muslim peoples. And the very living conditions of the Chechens in the barren mountains, without a sufficient economic base, made them unsuitable for any state order. Meanwhile, the Muslim religion, which arose about 1300 years ago among the nomad Arabs, reflected in itself the transition of this people to settled life and to the establishment of state order. The Koran — the Muslim Gospel — is not only a liturgical book, but at the same time, as it were, a code of laws; several ancient Muslim legalists adapted the sayings of the Qur'an to guide everyday relationships; these their interpretations of the holy Muslim book made up several additional books, on the basis of which all Muslim states are governed. Thus, Islam is not only a religion, but also obliges to a certain state order, which is most often denoted by the word "Sharia". Sharia establishes an organization of supreme authority to which all Muslims must obey; he also establishes a judicial organization ', so that all clashes between individuals and between groups of people must be resolved in special courts. The old freemen of the Chechens, of course,' could not fully obey the Sharia and alongside the Muslim law they adopted, their ancient custom continued to live and operate , the so-called "adat". Let us now see what place in life the Sharia gives to a woman, then it will be easier for us to understand what the position of a Chechen woman was before the revolution. According to Sharia, a woman, one might say, is completely excluded from public life; no man's eye should see her, except, of course, her husband and next of kin; therefore, outside the home, she can only appear wrapped in a veil, a “veil,” which completely hides her face and figure; with a silent shadow, she should slide along the street, stop when meeting a man, making way for him. Accordingly, the whole life of a woman remains, as it were, eternally underage; having property rights, she should not independently participate in any transactions; a man, a relative, speaks on her behalf. Likewise, a woman has no voice in the most important moment of her life — when deciding whether to marry. A Sharia marriage is simply a bargain in which the girl's father, or, in his absence, the closest senior male relative, sells it to the groom under certain conditions in the presence of the mullah and witnesses. The exact purchase price is called "kalym", in Chechen "Urdu"; the bride, for her part, brings to the house of her future husband, too, precisely defined property, the so-called "kebin-haqq", this property she owns and in case of divorce, takes it with her. According to Sharia law, you can have no more than 4 wives at a time, but you can change wives as much as you like. Every husband can breed himself; for this, he only needs to pronounce a precisely established phrase, which consists, approximately, of the words: "I let you go." After this, the wife must return to her home, taking away her dowry, and the husband; is obliged to maintain it for 2 - 3 months. But a wife cannot demand a divorce from her husband, except in a few strictly defined cases. Thus, a woman, according to Sharia, is completely slave to a man; it is simply seen as a thing; she is a man's instrument of pleasure, she is the producer of his children, she is a labor force: in the household. As you can see, Muslim laws were written by men and only for men. As already mentioned, before the revolution, Chechnya was just a few districts of the Terek region. and was run by Russian government officials; but in the mountains life went on in its own special way, and Russian officials in this internal one! Chechen life was interfered with only sporadically, mainly in the form of punitive expeditions; so that even before the revolution the Chechens lived according to their own laws, and not according to the Russians; we have already seen how one lived in this, let us now see how the life of a Chechen woman developed under the rule of sharia and adat. Starting from the cradle, the Chechen woman felt her powerlessness, since the birth of a girl, and not a boy, was usually met with displeasure; a boy is a future man and fighter, a successor of the family; and with the girl in the future, only fuss and the possibility of any collisions in connection with her marriage. So if a baby boy was surrounded by the attention available in conditions of mass Chechen poverty, then girls in the first years of life grew up completely homeless; Figures show us that the mortality rate of girls significantly exceeded the mortality rate of boys: with an approximately equal percentage of births of boys and girls, by the end of the first year of life there were only 87.8 girls per 100 boys. As soon as a girl grew up to 6-7 years old, she + a participant in the hard economic labor of his mother, while the boy enjoyed the unrestrained freedom of children; and this also strongly influenced the mortality of adolescent girls: the male population at the age of 4-19 is almost 11% higher than the female of the same age, while at a more mature age we see the opposite relationship, the numerical predominance of women. But now the girl is 12-13 years old and she is already becoming an adult; now she is directly affected by the deep humiliation in which the Muslim law and the ancient Chechen custom put a Chechen woman. True, the Chechen woman never wore a Muslim “veil”, and the girls walked with open faces, covering only their hair and part of their forehead with a black “chukhta”; but no man could touch her even with the tip of a finger; the girl did not dare to approach the man and still, of course, talk to him. The Chechen "adat" considered every touch! to a woman, as an attempt to rape and, therefore, insult the entire family, the entire "teip", for which the offended relatives had to take revenge; this custom is much more powerful than the veil; the woman is isolated from the male world, which owns life, her as a minor is protected by a harsh custom. Entangled by this custom, like a chador, the girl led her hard working life: she worked in the field, looked after the cattle, carried water from afar, and did continuous housework. In winter, in the slush, snow and frost, she ran without a warm outer dress, which she should not have for the same adat. > And, as we have seen, not everyone could endure this harsh life, many died before reaching the most blossoming, according to our concepts, the time of youth. There were, of course, fleeting joys: in the summer, when the sun went down, girls gathered in a light crowd at the spring, and at some distance male youth crowded; glances swift as lightning crossed, shy girlish ones ran through: smiles — here highland "romances" were struck, which did not always end happily; in any case, the choice of wives often took place at the spring. Other meeting places for young people were parties, arranged in winter, when the girls were somewhat relieved of their hard work; in someone's more or less cramped "kunatsk" on one side of the room, a cramped and colorful group sat in festively dressed girls, and on the other, a gray formation of male "Circassians"; a teenage girl plays the harmonica, to the sounds of which there is "courtship", that is, exchange of very expressive views, which had its own special designation in the Chechen language: "dog da-khar", that is, "Opening the heart"; and only, of course. Occasionally it also happened that some guy, who had planned a betrothed for himself, would lie in wait for her somewhere in a deserted place and exchanged two or three phrases with her; Of course, it was not very safe, but for some reason the guy was convinced of the girl's attitude towards him. Chechen girls had their own ideal of a man, which coincided in general with male ideas about this subject. We know that there have been cases when Chechen girls dared to resist the groom's harassment, which did not satisfy this ideal. Here is a Chechen song that the girls sing: My dear rode, Now the beloved rode, Long awaited, Long unseen, I will kiss the lips of the dear, I would kiss them if they were bloody like a wolf. Another song describes the raid on the Cossack a village led by a young Chechen brave: Look, friends, look: My brave fellow is wounded, Blood is flowing down his hand ... Joy is happiness ... I will take care of my brave fellow, I will bandage his wound with a silk sleeve The following song is unusually expressive. I do not need, mother, the One who sells Oil, firewood. I am not talking, mother, about a smart, tight-fitting, rich fellow. I say, mother, I love In rags dressed, Disheveled, as a wolf whose hair has peeled off. I TELL ABOUT the one who has a damask complexion, who has a wolf's heart. the same belligerent mood that possessed and owns mu the female half of the Chechen people, and which found expression in Chechen folk poetry. All these meetings prepared the most important events in the life of a Chechen woman of the past — getting married; but the person most interested in this event — the girl — was completely devilish and powerless. A Chechen could get himself a wife in 2 ways: 1) he sent matchmakers to the girl's parents, who agreed on all the details of the marriage as a trade deal: on the gifts of the groom to the bride and her family, which gifts were mandatory and required serious expenses from the groom; on the size of the ransom money - "Urdu", which was not actually paid by the groom, but was stipulated as some security for the wife in case of divorce; about the property that the girl will bring to the house of her future husband, etc. If the negotiating parties came to an agreement, the groom had to collect money for multiple exchange of gifts, as well as for arranging a wedding feast. Money was required for this, so much that often peasant farms were ruined as a result of the marriage of their sons. The marriage ceremony does not exist as a religious ceremony according to Sharia; accordingly, with the Chechens, the mullah, or, more often, some of his deputy, in the presence of the groom and close relatives of both parties, asked the bride if she wanted to get married, and pronounced a brief formula of the contract; that was the whole act of marriage. After performing a number of wedding ceremonies, the girl passed into the quality of a wife in the property of her husband, under whose authority her further life proceeded. It could also happen that "the groom had to collect the funds necessary for the marriage for a long time, and all this time the girl was considered to be his; according to Chechen customs, only the groom could refuse the bride, but in no way the other way around; and in this small detail (We feel all the power of a man, all the subordination of a woman. This is the first way for a Chechen woman to marry, the way established by the teachings of Sharia, according to which the bride is only a powerless subject of a trade deal. Another way of getting married is based on ancient Chechen customs: the groom or better to say, the one who is going to become the groom kidnaps the girl. The kidnapper persuades several of his peers, and now a group of armed young people with anim at the head is looking for the intended girl; seizing the moment the girl is seized and galloped to the groom's house. If the abduction is noticed by relatives girls, then an armed chase is organized, which can easily lead to a uniform battle between the kidnappers and the persecutors; the persecutors could recapture the girl, and this would be the greatest shame for the kidnappers; on the other hand, the murders possible in such circumstances led to an endless series of blood revenge; therefore, the kidnappers applied every effort to t ohm to make the chase pointless. The kidnappers brought the girl to the house of one of the relatives or peers of the groom, after which the groom could call on the mullah, who, having pronounced the above marriage formula, legalized, so to speak, the abduction; after that, the girl continued to stay in the house where she was brought, while negotiations began on the material side of the marriage; at the end of these negotiations, the "swing" rite was performed, that is, the final legalization of marriage, and the girl moved to the groom's house as his wife. Usually the kidnapper first tried to find out the attitude of the kidnapped girl towards him and firmly decided to abduct, only after making sure that the girl was disposed towards him. But there were cases, though leading to dire consequences, when a girl was abducted in the truest sense of the word, against her will, against the will of even her parents. One has only to imagine this as the custom-illuminated right of every man to appropriate any unmarried woman to himself, in order to understand what place in Chechen society was given to a Chechen woman. So, a Chechen could get himself a bride by kidnapping any girl he liked. The kidnapping of the girl did not at all mean that the groom could not come to terms peacefully with her parents; to obtain a bride for oneself by kidnapping meant gaining universal approval and fame as a "real" man. But nevertheless, the family of the kidnapped considers itself gravely offended, and if during the time no intermediaries came from the side of the kidnapped clan, then the offended clan could start military operations. But such intermediaries usually came, they were treated to corn cakes and lamb, and discussed with them questions about "Urdu", about compensation for an insult, etc .; in such cases, the marriage usually went well after a while. But very often the abduction of girls was due to the unwillingness of the parents to marry her off to the given groom, in such cases more serious clashes could occur between the clans, ending in a relationship of blood revenge - "mustugulla"; but this latter rarely happened, since the ancient custom was still on the side of the kidnapper. And in this case, the girl was viewed by both parents and kidnappers not as an independent human being, but simply as an object that the parents possessed and which the groom sought to acquire. Thus, the custom, like the Sharia, did not recognize a girl's right to control her own destiny; But we saw above that, in fact, Chechen girls had some opportunity to show their will and, although this opportunity was extremely limited, still Chechens were not completely impersonal creatures. But the girl got married and began a harsh life full of obligations for her. It should be noted that, despite the fact that the Sharia law permits marriage at any age, from the cradle to the deepest old age, the Chechens got married and got married mostly relatively late: girls aged 16-18, boys - more often, then, when they ceased to be young men and turned into mature men. So, as soon as a woman got into her (husband's) house, the work of housekeeping was piled on her shoulders, and this work in any peasant farm, especially in the mountains, is extremely much. we have seen, sometimes real engineering work; there you have to be both a bricklayer and an excavator and a loader, in addition to performing heavy agricultural work itself. On the plane, you often have to monitor irrigation canals, which is also a big work in itself. almost exclusively a woman on his shoulders; a Chechen, at best, takes part in sowing and mowing meadows; after all, he is a fighter, a defender of the family and clan, it is indecent for him to bog down in everyday and peaceful labor. farm: she monitors the condition of her sheep and cows, she makes supplies of milk and dairy products, she collects wool and processes it into mountain ukno, in beetroots, and in other accessories of men's and women's suits. Indeed, a Chechen woman is a "small universal factory", working tirelessly all year round. If these labors would reward her sufficiently, if at home. herself she saw contentment and prosperity, then her situation would not be so difficult; wealth would provide her with the opportunity to have at least some rest; but the Chechen family, especially in the state's disdainful attitude towards women; 1 at any time the husband could send his wife away, which would be the greatest shame for her; moreover, it was not considered as an insult to the wife's family and did not cause family enmity; the husband was only obliged to return the "kebin-hakk", that is, dowry, as well as Urdu, and that ended his obligations. And there were always enough "wiring" in the Chechen villages. But “the divorce was associated with the loss of a well-established labor force, with damage to the economy and to the tranquility of the owner; therefore, the Chechen preferred to cruelly “teach” his wife for the slightest offense, so that beaten women were not uncommon in the everyday life of Chechen families. At the first Chechen regional congress of women-members of village councils, which took place in October 1927, the delegates in their very first speeches recalled the terrible beatings that the Chechen women had dutifully endured as a necessary part of their life. "We must firmly remember," said the delegate of Arsanov, "how our husbands beat us ..." Endless labor, constant childbirth on a dirty floor, unlimited servicing to her husband and how me-Yilo a woman's rights for all ego — constant beatings. The woman was isolated from the rest of society, she was entirely dependent on the whim of her husband; adat said that a husband could kill his wife's lover who was caught in the act with impunity; there could be no revenge for this murder. We see that the restraining forces of tribal relations did not act in relation to the woman, which alone set the boundaries for the arbitrariness of individual members of Chechen society. A Chechen woman was in the complete power of a man, first as a daughter, then as a wife. But despite this, the Chechen woman, not only as a wayward girl, demanded the qualities of a stern warrior from her fiance; becoming a wife, she knew how to courageously share with her husband all those heavy hardships to which the wolfish way of abrogacy had doomed; and we know how often a Chechen had to take this path. Moreover, there were cases when the Chechen women themselves were made doomed and, together with their husbands, raised fear in the Caucasian administration. Now all this is in the past. The Soviet regime is opening all the ways for the Chechen woman so that she can go free with all her masses and build a better future for herself with her own hands.