2. Life of Afghans and the position of women.
As we have seen, the population of Afghanistan consists of elements heterogeneous in origin and occupation, semi-nomadic, semi-settled, living in a wide variety of natural and living conditions. There is, of course, a big difference between the inhabitants of Kabul, where there is even some European comfort, and the inhabitants of the outskirts, living in yurts or even in caves, both culturally and in everyday life. Therefore, it is easy to understand that not only the poor and the rich, landowners, merchants, peasants and artisans live differently, but the lives of people in different regions also differ sharply from each other and, consequently, the position of women in the family is also different. We will try to find what is common to all Afghans in their relationship to women, and to note those features that distinguish, in this respect, one group of the population from another. This common is reflected, first of all, in the religion of Afghans, in Islam, which has its Sharia law based on the Koran (the holy scriptures of Muslims) and traditions. A special feature of Sharia is precisely that it determines the daily routine of a person's life in the most precise way, down to the smallest details. Marriage law, for example, is so thoroughly developed that it is precisely indicated what even the most intimate relationship between husband and wife should be. This gives a certain stability to family relations in all Muslim countries. But the Sharia is only a certain leveling factor. It would be a mistake to think that in all Muslim countries the position of women is the same. Indeed, we see that the position of a Muslim woman varies not only from country to country, but also in the same country, as, for example, in Afghanistan it is not the same among different classes or groups of the population. nomads or semi-nomads, where the husband grazes cattle, goes hunting, and the wife does all the hard household work and, moreover, is forced to follow her husband along difficult mountain passages, then, of course, she wins back certain rights for herself, and they cannot those restrictions that are observed among sedentary farmers be imposed. Here a number of works are performed by a man, since a woman is not capable of building a house, plowing a mountain field, etc. Therefore, a woman loses her independence, and she becomes a driven creature; where the owner is so rich that oh can completely remove her from the economy, she completely loses her freedom. The second thing that all Afghans have in common, of course, to varying degrees, is strong remnants of the family life. Ancestral life, with its terrible offspring, blood feud, is a real scourge of the Afghan population. If in a fight someone killed another, the closest relative of the killed person must take revenge on the culprit, and the family of the killed person will calm down until revenge is taken. Since these fights happen very often, especially over "women, money or land", whole villages are in a state of constant enmity and entire tribes are subject to extinction. The extent to which this enmity reaches can be judged by the following incident: In one village, in which houses were located on both sides of a single street, there was a fight. It so happened that the residents of one side of the street were in one party of the fighting, and the residents of the other side were in the other party. As a result of this fight, incidents of blood feud arose, and residents on both sides of the street found themselves in an irreconcilable feud. There was a constant firefight and in order to get to the well, which was at the end of the street, residents broke through the doors from the sides of the houses and so, under the cover of the walls, moved from house to house in order to collect water. At the well, it was agreed not to shoot. Sometimes women are drawn into this enmity. Travelers report many cases when a woman picks up a rifle in order to avenge her brother or other close relative. But this, of course, is among nomadic tribes, where tribal remnants are still strong and the woman is not hidden in a dark half-house. But let us now turn to an examination of the life of certain important groups of the population and the position of women among them. If we take agricultural regions, like Afghan Turkestan, we will see that here the land belongs mainly not to landowners engaged in agriculture, but to buyers \ lands from among officials and merchants who themselves continue to live in the city, and the land is cultivated by the peasants - "dekhans" on the terms of the gigantic. This is explained by the fact that buying land in Afghanistan is the most reliable and profitable way of saving. Where the land is fertile, there are large landowners, and the worse the land or the conditions of cultivation, the less often landowners' land is found and the more peasants there are living on their land. The land is cultivated in a primitive way - with a plow on a pair of bulls, or even just with a shovel, since the owner of two bulls is already a wealthy peasant.Irrigated land is cultivated better and more thoroughly. Fertilization is not produced. It must be said that it is equally difficult for a peasant to live both on the landlord's and on his own land: in the first case, he has to give the landlord the lion's share of his harvest, and on his land he is entirely dependent on the local chiefs of "alak-gifts", who disregarding the instructions of the center ("far from the center"), they rob the peasants at their own discretion. The fear of the peasants before these insatiable "alakdars" is so great that (according to the testimony of one of our comrades who recently returned from Afghanistan), seeing the alakdar from afar, the peasants turn off the path so as not to meet him. Thus, both the peasant-owner and the "chariker", that is, working on the land of the landowners, uses an insignificant part of the fruits of his labor. In accordance with this, his life is unpretentious, rather poor. The peasants live in clay houses or in yurts, which, as needed, are moved closer to the place of field work, or even in caves. Afghan farmers live in villages in several yards, depending on the amount of land suitable for farming and the conditions of cultivation. Inside the house, in the middle of the room, there is a hearth dug in the ground, and in city houses there is a special brazier for charcoal called "mankal". The hearth or mankal serve both to warm the dwelling and for (cooking. There are almost no signs of 'furniture in the room. It is replaced by blankets, skins, carpets or, mats, pillows. The master's goods are kept in chests, here they are called "sanduk", which are placed Rarely, already as a luxury, one can see in the house of an Afghan a bed "char-pai" (literally - a four-knuckle), or even a camp bed, accidentally inherited by its owner. Afghans eat mainly flour food, wheat or barley cakes, and vegetables. Meat is used very rarely, although the national dish is "pilaf", made from fatty lamb and rice. This dish is available only for wealthy people. The food of the poor is dry bread, no wonder the word "nan" - bread, is also used to denote words lunch. The life of nomads is even simpler. The yurt is the center of their whole life. It is made of felt, mainly black, but there are also gray and white, depending on the color of the wool of the sheep, since the wool is finite but not stained. Spending most of their time in transitions from one pasture to another, nomads on the passes collect a yurt, in which and around which all vital processes take place. Here and cattle are slaughtered "they milk animals, prepare food, wash clothes, etc., etc. The cultural level of Afghans is very low. We have information about folk medicine in Afghanistan. As a preventive measure against diseases, Afghans use amulets: a piece paper, with an inscription from the Koran and consecrated by the mullah, is embedded in a leather bag or medallion of silver and worn around the neck or on the arm.The population of Afghanistan is still so ignorant that they still believe in the miraculous power of such amulets.You will not meet a single Afghan, even the poorest worker, without such an amulet.Of the medical techniques Afghans use bloodletting and laxatives, and in such large sizes that these funds often lead to a sad end.In case of severe hemorrhage or when an arm or leg is cut off, the wound is filled with boiling oil or a limb drops into a bowl of boiling oil.In case of minor wounds, the wound is covered with ashes.In case of fever, no matter what origin, the patient is wrapped in the fresh skin of a newly killed goat, and covered with a blanket. This causes sweating and sometimes helps, although it greatly weakens the patient. Another way of "ladies" is to burn the body with a piece of cloth dipped in oil. This method is used for a variety of diseases: indigestion, neuralgia, rheumatism, headache, etc. Mullahs, fakirs, healers who have no idea of ​​medicine, they wander from one place to another and cause colossal harm to the population, are engaged in treatment, With no control over themselves. Malaria, smallpox, tuberculosis, cholera, bloody diarrhea and syphilis are very common in Afghanistan. When attempts were made to introduce smallpox vaccination at the end of the last century, this measure was met with very hostility, but soon the population became convinced of the enormous benefits of smallpox vaccination and now, albeit with some caution, they go to the points where smallpox is inoculated. This method of treatment is called "zan". In general, Afghans, urged by ignorant mullahs, everywhere opposed the introduction of European medicine in their country. Several times foreigners founded hospitals in Kabul, and every time a doctor left, his successor did not find a hospital. Hospital buildings were turned into warehouses for war materials or rented out for other purposes. Here is the background against which the life of a woman unfolds. If we add that slavery existed in Afghanistan until recently, that the law "an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth" is being fulfilled, that is, literally, but the eyes are gouged out, arms, legs, noses are cut off - it will become clear that the position of a woman here is at a correspondingly low level. In fact, the position of a woman in Afghanistan is quite aptly defined by the statement of one learned English traveler. He writes: "Although a woman is not treated badly, she is considered to be property." Yes, in Afghanistan until very recently, and to a large extent to this day, women are considered property. A woman is bought as a wife, a father sells his daughters, a brother of sisters to their future husbands. At the same time, note that this is not a question of a slave captured from a tribe of "infidels" (there are also men as slaves), but of the most devout Muslim woman. To characterize the psychology of an Afghan, let us give an example that immediately introduces the essence of a man's relationship with a woman: In a fit of jealousy or anger, an Afghan man cut off his wife's nose. (This happens quite often and a special surgical operation has been developed there, thanks to which the disfigured face is somewhat corrected: part of the forehead skin is pulled to the nose). Then, recollecting himself, the Afghan went with his wife to the hospital of one mission, where the doctor told him that it was impossible to perform a conventional operation, since his wife had a too small forehead, and advised him to prescribe an artificial nose from London, which would cost 30 rupees (about 15 rubles ). The Afghan man thought about it and, when the doctor asked what he was thinking, said: “I think that the nose will cost 30 rupees, and for 80 rupees I can buy a new wife.” This was said in the most ordinary tone, and it was not hooliganism from the point of view of an Afghan, but a simple everyday calculation. The Afghans have firmly adopted the view of women as property, more or less profitably acquired, and we will see that even after the reforms, not much has been changed in this respect. The wife is bought, and once the price has been paid he can do with his property as he pleases. Afghans enter into marriages only after reaching adulthood, i.e. a man at 20 years old (when the beard grows back), and a woman at 15-16 years old. In the eastern part of the country, where the influence of India is stronger, as well as in cities, marriages are concluded earlier, at the age of 15-12. Wealthy Afghans marry even younger, sometimes even before puberty. The age difference between the rich and the poor is explained, of course, by the need to save up money to buy out his wife. Various tribes marry freely, marry both Tajiks and Persians. According to Muslim law, an Afghan has the right to support four wives and an unlimited number of concubines, but this right is enjoyed only by wealthy people or people who for a household or enterprise (like, nair., Handicraftsmen) workers are required. The choice of the bride is done as follows. A matchmaker from the husband's relatives is sent to the alleged bride; she examines the bride and reports what she saw to her husband's parents. Then, when the consent of the parents of both parties has been previously clarified and the ransom amount has been established, the groom's father, accompanied by relatives, goes to the bride's father. At the same time, the bridegroom's relatives visit the bride's mother. The father hands over the ring sent by the groom and asks the bride's father to agree that his son become his (the bride's father) servant. The bride's father answers: "for good." Then, treats are brought and passages from the Koran are recited. The bride's father presents minor gifts to the groom, and the engagement is considered perfect. Between the engagement and the wedding, 2-3 months pass, but sometimes 2-3 years, depending on the groom's funds, because the wedding cannot take place until the ransom is paid to the bride's parents. At this time, a dowry is prepared for the bride, consisting of clothes and household items, but the ransom amount is always greater than the value of the dowry. In villages where women go without a veil, the choice is freer, the groom sees the bride himself and there are cases of brides being taken away. In view of such a long time between engagement and wedding, premarital meetings are practiced in some places. The bride and groom meet with the assistance of the mother, but secretly from the father. Kisses are allowed, but not sexual intercourse. These secret meetings are called "entertainment of the betrothed" (naumzud bazi). This custom is widespread among the nobility. Even the emirs often went to the “naumzud bazi” at midnight. A marriage is concluded by an agreement signed by a judge, and the formal consent of the bride and groom is required to conclude this agreement. In addition to the executions (judge) and both parties, the contract is signed by witnesses. The contract is handed over to the wife; the husband can divorce his wife without giving any reasons. A woman cannot do this. If she wants to divorce her husband, she can turn to the judge if she has good reason to do so. But this is very rarely practiced, a woman is so downtrodden that she does not dare to exercise her right. The contract provides for the provision of the woman in the event of divorce or the death of her husband. When the contract is signed, the hands and feet of the bride and groom are covered with one henna veil. The day after the conclusion of the contract, the wedding procession departs from the bride's house to the groom's house. During this procession, young people dance to the sound of music, show different riding techniques, a group of older youths dance the national tribal dance with sabers. At the groom's house, the bride is handed over to the groom. The wedding feast begins, but what will a woman expect in her husband's house? The woman is completely hidden from the gaze of strangers. She lives in a special half, carefully fenced off from the rooms in which men spend time and where they receive guests. She rarely goes outside, and when she appears, she is covered with a veil that falls to her heels. This veil "burka" does not even have a full cutout at the eyes, like women in other Muslim countries. In Afghan women, this neckline is covered with some kind of mesh mart. 2. An Afghan woman with a veil. teria, muslin, etc. Through such a mesh it is very difficult to see and the eyes get sick from the tension. The rest of the Afghan outfit? consists of wide trousers, a long shirt with long sleeves, stockings and shoes. Hair, braided in small braids, is covered with a scarf, and a skullcap over it. For the street, the described burka or "chadur" is still worn. In a rich family, a woman is completely isolated, she does not dare to appear in a room when guests are there. Nobody talks about her or talks about her. It is considered 'indecent to inquire about the health of a wife or daughter. Leading a well-fed, monotonous life, devoid of any reasonable occupations, withdrawn from even participating in the household and without leaving the female half for days on end, she quickly turns into her husband's toy, greedy for jewelry and sweets. Few women, even those of the wealthy classes, can read, and being able to write was considered reprehensible for a woman. After all, she could use her knowledge to correspond with her lover! An Afghan woman is also susceptible to her husband's outbursts of jealousy, which Afghans, with their fighting nature, are especially harsh, as we saw in the example of a woman with a cut off nose. However, Mohammedan law allows a husband to beat his wives, but Afghans consider it reprehensible to use this right. Therefore, as an everyday phenomenon - beating "wives" in Afghanistan is absent. As a mother, the Afghan woman enjoys certain respect, and in raising children she plays a major role in the family. We will not dwell in more detail on the life of a wealthy Afghan woman, because she is not much different from harem life of a woman in any eastern country where Sharia dominates. 3. Working woman of Afghanistan
There is no industrial proletariat in Afghanistan. Several thousand workers employed in a few factories and plants, in the short period of existence of most of these enterprises, have not yet managed to develop a special working life and influence the life of the rest of the population. There is no doubt that in the future, with the growth of Afghan industry, the cadre of workers and their share in the life of the country will also grow, but at present, when we talk about a working woman in Afghanistan, we mean an Afghan peasant woman and an Afghan nomad. Both take part, moreover, very active, in household work, and some production processes are performed exclusively by women. Because of this, a woman here acquires a certain freedom both in the sense of movement and in the sense of the manifestation of her personality. The legal status of both peasant women and nomadic pastoralists before the law remains, of course, the same as that of a woman-city dweller and a woman of privileged classes, but the customs and lifestyle of these strata of the population give them somewhat more freedom and do not bind them by such complex fetters prejudice. In a peasant family, a woman does all the housework; along with her husband, she works in the field, helping him to clear the numerous small canals through which water flows to irrigate the fields. She grinds flour in a hand mill, spins wool on a primitive spinning wheel and makes carpets and fabrics. All these works require constant movement from place to place and this would not be possible if the woman wore her veil, which descends from the crown to the hem of the dress and interfering with walking. Therefore, we see that in the villages an Afghan woman walks bareheaded, in a shirt with short sleeves and an open neck. When an Afghan peasant woman is not at work, she closes only at the sight of a stranger. But the Afghan woman has no right to communicate with other people's men even in the village: this is considered indecent. At home in the family, men and women dine together, but if an outsider is present, the women eat separately. They rarely appear in a room where a stranger is sitting, but their absence in such cases is not so necessary! as, for example, among the Armenians or among the Persians. It is also a woman's responsibility to supply the economy with water. If the source is near a village, this is not a big deal. But often the source is several! miles from housing, and then women have to go every two or three days at dawn for water. which they collect in leather furs and transport on donkeys. Women are not exempt from this duty even when the way to get water is difficult and fraught with some dangers. For example, in one of the eastern regions of Afghanistan, in Zeybak, located at an altitude of 9.250 feet, the water in rivers and streams freezes in winter and women bring water from afar, from places where there are spring springs. Here are excerpts from an Afghan song describing the area. “Nowhere are there such snows and winds as in Zeybak in winter, there is no such cold in any place under the sky. Wherever you look, you cannot find any traces here: you cannot see the earth from the abundance of ice and snow. Winter continues in others for three or four months the edges, it stretches for eight months in these places. In an earthen oven they burn only a damp thorn and thaw, and that's all! Who will not go blind and watery from the smoke? Their wives go a whole mile to fetch water. Woe to the top woman who stumbles in her gait. If anyone gets sick, there are no medicines or doctors. Shave someone's head - and then there is no barber. " her sister went to a peasant farm. The nomad works even more, while her husband cares very little about the household. She dismantles and assembles the yurts that serve as their dwelling during stops. Oops, no worse than a man, he loads animals and it is easier than him to carry weights. Moving from one place to another, women not only carry children and all belongings, but in addition they lead pack animals; and the husband walks alongside, burdened only with his gun, with which he does not part. But the Afghan nomad does not know "cha-fool" at all. In constant transitions in the fresh air, spending time in hard physical labor, she is well developed physically, healthy and beautiful.In the handicraft industry, the Afghan woman is mainly engaged in the manufacture of woolen blankets, carpets and fabrics. Cashmere is weaved, a very soggy fabric made of wool of sheep and goats, shawls "lyunga", etc. In this case, women usually prepare yarn and warp, and men weave. Felt rugs are made by women in a special way. The wool is moistened, then it is mixed and crumpled by hand until a dense mass is obtained. This mass is shaped and dimensioned as required and dried. When finished, these) carpets are 3 / 2-1 "thick; they are gray or black, or painted brown with pale flower ornaments. The Afghan woman is also the keeper of traditional medicine traditions. The woman provides first aid to the wounded and disabled, and for these cases, the Afghan women have developed certain methods of treatment. The Afghan woman quite deftly sews up wounds with an ordinary sewing needle, using her own hair instead of threads. "Fig. 3. An Afghan woman for threshing. In the absence of hospitals, medical specialists, any kind of medical care and a low level of culture, one can imagine hygienic conditions in which Afghans live. In poor houses where it is crowded, women live terribly crowded, 8-10 people in a small room. Bedspreads, wide trousers and shirts with their numerous folds are a fertile surface for the accumulation of dirt and dust. never wash. When an Afghan woman is about to become a mother, different slander begins to have a boy. Childbirth takes place in the same musty female half. Afghan nomads in this regard are even worse. If childbirth occurs on the way, the caravan, of course, from "Doesn't stop for that. Usually, the day after giving birth, she has to follow the caravan with the baby in her arms, as if nothing had happened." I can not say that this leads to female illnesses, which often end tragically for the mother, despite the fact that nomads, as we have seen, are very strong physically and tempered in constant transitions. So, we drew the life circle of a woman in pre-reform Afghanistan. ' We tried to highlight what is inherent in all tribes and all nationalities inhabiting Afghanistan, or most of them, and to identify the position of women in certain classes, certain production groups. There are, of course, deviations in both directions. In some tribes, for example, we see that the woman enjoys more freedom. So, among the Hezarians, the wife receives guests in the absence of her husband, and if the husband, returning home, sees that other people's shoes are at the yurt, he leaves so as not to interfere with the conversation between his wife and the guest. About kafirs in Afghanistan they say that they sell their wives for one night. But this is obviously slander caused by the freer position of the kafirka. As a general rule, deviations in custom depend on the influence of neighboring countries; in the west, the influence of Persia is stronger, in the east - the influence of India, and in the north - the influence of our Uzbeks and Kirghiz. It is interesting to note that the position of women before the start of reforms gradually deteriorated. At the beginning of the last century, according to the then travelers, Afghan women, in the absence of her husband, received guests like hostesses. These travelers celebrate their courtesy, modesty, and cheerful disposition. At present, such communication between Afghans and foreign men is out of the question. Here. obviously, the Persian influence and zealous Muslimization of the region played a role.