3. Women's movement in pre-revolutionary Turkey
The despotic regime of the sultans, the concentration in the hands of the clergy of supervision and guidance of almost all aspects of the life of the people (education, court, social and family life, etc.) not only interfered with the economic development of the people, but also led to the fact that the Turkish intelligentsia was in a semi-pro-tarized state. This: the situation helped to revolutionize the advanced strata of Turkish society. Undoubtedly, the city woman fully reflected the situation and all the moods and desires of the intelligentsia and the emerging bourgeoisie, and along with them, the Turkish woman speaks out with the demands of the struggle for emancipation and thus she participates in the general Turkish revolutionary movement. History of Turkey notes many attempts by individual women, to get out of their oppressed position, but the social conditions of the old regime did not favor the development of the women's movement that arose at the end of the 19th century. As noted, the women's movement began with a campaign against traditional clothing. Gradually, a European novel got into the harem for a fashion magazine. After him, Ekrem Bey's original play "Afiv-Angzhe-lik" (the birth of Angelica), dedicated to a woman, appears on the Turkish stage. It was a hot protest against the lack of rights of the Turkish woman. After her, poems and verses appear in literature, describing the corrupting atmosphere of harem life. Finally, a magazine is organized in Constantinople, around which the champions of women's liberation are united. They are waging a stubborn struggle against a tendentious view of women, against female trafficking, and they reveal the harm of polygamy. They proclaim the woman's right to motherhood, the right to freely choose her husband, and the right to love. Women's schools are opening in large cities. This first period of the women's movement was purely cultural in nature. Among the huge mass of small Turkish artisans and handicraftsmen-peasants, another process was taking place at that time, which, perhaps, more strongly than the organized movement of the urban woman reflected on the woman of the working class. The increasing cost of living, exhausting taxes and, most importantly, the competition between the cheaper foreign commodity of large-scale production and small-scale handicraft production, made the hard labor of women in many branches of the indigenous industry completely unprofitable. This circumstance led to a significant restriction of polygamy among the listed groups of workers and thereby unwittingly contributed to the 'improvement of the lot of the Turkish female worker. The struggle of the Old Turks with the Europeanized Young Turks that took place in this period was not reflected at all in the pages of the women's press. Despite this, on pioneers of the women's movement, brutal persecutions soon followed by the most reactionary sultan "bloody" Abdul-Hamid, who reigned in 1876. The magazine was closed, some writers were arrested, exiled, strangled, others fled abroad. A turning point has come in the development of the women's movement. If before the cause of women's lack of rights was seen in social prejudices and the cultural revival of society was exposed against them, now, after the death of the first undertakings, it became clear that first it was necessary to throw off the political shackles that prevented the people from living and breathing. The woman realized that the first and closest enemy on her way to liberation was the Sultan's regime with all its economic and political system. Executions, exile, wars tore away hundreds and thousands of sons and husbands from mothers and wives. And the woman accumulates a dull indignation against the brutal government. The restoration of the constitution in 1909 and the overthrow of the bloody Abdul-Hamid made it possible to once again expand the women's movement, but now, along with the idea of ​​emancipation, the idea of ​​a struggle to improve the economic situation of women was carried out. Since that time, many women have taken part in the revolutionary movement, which took place under the Young Turk banner and led by the "Unity and Progress" organization, which had its own women's committee. Women helped as much as they could. The traditional sanctity of the harem has been a reliable defense for revolutionary enterprises. Here, revolutionary correspondence and literature were hidden from government spies. Women copied and transported the literature of revolutionary leaders. The extraordinary nationality that swept the whole country in connection with the political upheaval of 1908-1909 affected the Turkish woman, who participates in freedom manifestations with an open face. At the first women's rallies, it was decided to abolish the custom of covering up faces and seeking full equality. But in Anatolia, where the bulk of the inhabitants are peasants, the women's movement was very weak. Here prejudices, traditions and the authority of the clergy were still strong. Ignorance and superstition still reigned here, but this time too, the women's movement was unlucky. The Young Turkish government (1909-1918) suppressed any initiative of the women's unions and ordered the police to "vigilantly monitor the observance of Turkish women 'national new customs and prescriptions of religion ”. This proves that the liberation aspirations of Turkish women were strongly at odds with the views of the ruling party, as well as the fact that the leaders of the renewed Turkey, the Young Turks, these glorified Europeans, still held on or were forced to adhere to the traditions of pre-reform Islam.

4. Turkish woman in the struggle for independence
The position of women completely changes with the onset of the world war. At this time, women's organizations of the patriotic direction organize assistance to the front, open soldiers' canteens, hospitals, etc., The unsuccessful war and the subsequent occupation of Turkey, cause wide participation of women already in political (events since 1918 .A city and village woman of Anatolia takes part in the national revolutionary movement. A number of women like Aishe-Khanum and others serve in the army and receive military distinctions. An urban woman goes to serve in the newly organized institutions and hospitals. A peasant woman (goes to military factories, she works in close proximity to the front, digs trenches, in her hands almost all the pack transport, finally, the young woman is responsible for delivering cartridges, shells and food to the battle line. (The woman's quick penetration into production and service in various government agencies broke all the conventions and barriers that separated a woman from equal work with a man. This has resulted in a series of women's equality activities undertaken by the government of the new Turkey.13 First of all, universal compulsory education was introduced in primary schools, where girls should be brought up with boys. Finally, the woman got free access to high school. Special preparatory courses for women have been established at the faculties of the University of Constantinople. At first, women were denied access to the faculties of law and medicine, but then this prohibition was lifted. Already in 1920 in Sivas, a teacher Makbule created a women's league and there were up to 15 societies pursuing charitable, cultural and political goals; they provide assistance to the unemployed, open special schools, workshops, support handicrafts that were revived during the war. First of all, a woman won a place among teachers. For some 5-6 years in Turkey, there are several hundred teachers who unite in special societies. By 1924, a union of women's equality was organized (from the women's section of the Committee for the Defense of Rights and the Women's People's Party), numbering hundreds of women. The union develops its activities mainly in. the area of ​​improving the life and position of urban women Thus, a special society was organized to combat prostitution and others. However, it should be noted that this union and others like it, created in Anatolia, consisting mainly of representatives of the Turkish bourgeoisie and groups adjacent to it, directed all their activities only to towards the achievement of cultural goals. The narrow class character of all these women's organizations did not allow them to openly fight for the political rights of women, to fight for her liberation from the religious and legislative fetters and outdated traditions that still hold in their tenacious hands the bulk of Turkish women - Turkish peasant women. Therefore, the women's union threw out political articles from the charter and limited itself to work on the mental development of women and the upbringing of the younger generation, but the union's charter was never approved by the government. The union organized meetings of members, at which resolutions of a principled nature on family laws were discussed and adopted. The demands of women boiled down to the following: the abolition of polygamy, the establishment of the institution of marriage on a cultural basis, the limitation of divorce, the establishment of a girl's marriageable age at 17, the obligation of spouses to exchange medical certificates of health before marriage. These demands were supported and proclaimed by the leaders of the women's movement, writers - Nesi-Khem-Mukhedin, Khalp-de-Khanum, Khalide-Edib, etc. It is interesting to note that in 1924 the VIST commission on religious affairs, which right, she did not dare to abolish polygamy in her draft law, adding only that a wife is recognized as having the right to demand that her husband not take a second wife. The spouse who agreed to this enters into the marriage contract about his refusal to have multiple wives. However, the government found it inconvenient to discuss this project in the Majlis, considering it incompatible with the spirit of the recent reforms. In view of this, the old decrepit family laws that did not correspond to the spirit of the time were left in force, and with them the custom of kidnapping brides, etc. Such a government policy indicates that the leaders of the Turkish national movement as a bourgeois movement, with all its characteristic features, having achieved success over the internal reaction, felt enough strength in themselves to refrain from the next necessary step on the path to emancipation. It finds no confirmation of the fact that, according to the 1924 constitution, a woman is deprived of all electoral rights. On this issue, the government turned out to be weaker than the oppositional elements headed by the clergy, under the onslaught of which it was forced to make concessions and refuse to involve women in the political life of the country. It is clear that this situation could not last long. The refusal to legalize the rights of women will undoubtedly revolutionize the Turkish woman, showing her the illusiveness of the successes she achieved without the main one! the right to equal participation in the political life of the country. At the same time, the basic principles of the People's Party include points that make it possible to conclude that the leaders of the national movement decided to pay the most serious attention to the position of the Turkish woman. For example, in the economic development of the country, the People's Party presents cooperation between a man and a woman as a truth that does not require proof. It goes without saying that both the entire program and the interpretation of the women's issue contains only general principles in the spirit of a bourgeois-democratic island, and no more. The leaders of the national movement, as well as the persons at the head of the women's movement, strenuously emphasize, that they are by no means advocates of accelerated emancipation. First of all, in their opinion, it is necessary to Europeanize the country, in general, to change its way of life, customs, legislation and even the appearance of every citizen. And, indeed, the Europeanization of the country began with clothes. Tailcoat and hat replaced the traditional costume and fez. And if the peasant woman of Anatolia still wears a "feridge" and a veil, then her sisters in Constantinople, Smyrna and other cities have thrown off their veils and are already wearing European dress. The beginning of the change in morals was laid by the introduction of new codes of criminal and especially civil, which fundamentally destroy the entire system of Islamic law. The adoption of these codes is of great importance for Turkey, because with their entry into force (1926), the legal relationship that was a remnant medieval feudalism. This was most clearly manifested in the legal status of a Turkish woman. Freed from the clutches of a harem life, a Turkish woman continued to remain in the atmosphere of the old family life associated with customary law — adat and Sharia. It was necessary to destroy the patriarchal structure of the family, imbued with the spirit of conservatism and religious prejudice. (This was successfully achieved by the introduction of a new civil code and a new law on marriage. They introduce a completely different beginning in the social structure and family law of the new Turkey. Turkish women now have the opportunity to build his family life on the basis of free choice and equality. 'The new law has made a revolution in marriage law in Turkey. Civil marriage has now been introduced to replace the existing religious marriage. The implementation of this new law has met with opposition from the population and passes through almost the entire country painlessly. and especially workers are very willing to register. The first such marriages, in the capital, were, as it were, indicative, were conducted in a tor-formerly and now feminine atmosphere, with speeches and speeches, the city administration. The new Civil Code establishes gender equality. Under the new law. , divorce can be received only through the courts. Thus, a Turkish woman receives the well-known protection of the law against the arbitrariness of her husband. Monogamy is finally established. Of course, in some places, especially in remote places, old customs and traditions still hold, considering the work of a woman shameful not only for her, but also for the family. Still partially retained its strength and tradition, according to which it is considered a special shame for a woman that she is unmarried (this custom has always put a woman in a particularly difficult position). These prejudices are still held mainly among the rest of the elements of the Turkish people, moreover, the wealthy strata have to be withdrawn to this part. The bulk of Turkish women, the entire intelligentsia and working people of Turkey are not fully prepared for the adoption of new legislation. The new civil code and the law on marriage are called upon to play a huge cultivating role in the family and social life of the country. On the ruins of the old sultan Turkey with harems and the slave position of women a new family, a new statehood is created. The new codes are the end of a long and stubborn struggle waged by the Turkish people for their liberation from the remnants of feudalism and the sultanate and caliphate that led it. The new civil code is a victory for the Turkish woman on the road to equality. Here we have a certain pressure on the ruling circles of Turkey, but this time from the Turkish working masses, the intelligentsia and even the bourgeoisie, which wants to live in a European way. However, in the new code, a certain concession is made to the old order. Namely, the abolition of polygamy has no retroactive effect. A Turk who at the time of the entry into force of the new code, i.e., by October 1, 1926, had several only wives have the right to continue to live in the old way.