2. Woman of Old China
First of all, let us consider those aspects of the life of a Chinese woman, which are approximately the same in all social groups of the country. Such points are: the legal status of a woman, the conditions of birth, the form of marriage, etc. In the future, we will move on to consider the specific living conditions of a working Chinese woman, which distinguishes her from the life of women of the propertied classes. As in most countries of the East, in China the woman, during its centuries-old history, occupied a subordinate, half-slave position. Deprived of the right to participate in public life, the Chinese woman lived a special primitive life as a pile, in which her entire existence revolved around one center — family and household; however, even here the Chinese woman was not an independent, full-fledged mistress, but a slave to the harsh despotic discipline and tradition that reigned in the Chinese family. This powerless, subordinate position of the Chinese woman was also justified by legislation. Confucianism, this code, not so much religious dogmas as norms and prescriptions of everyday morality, won a victory over other religious teachings, Taoism and Buddhism and was officially recognized as the state religion (already in 574 AD). deity and the other world, considering them pointless and unnecessary, dealt mainly with issues of public life, and reflected the main features of the then existing Lfeudal system. It set itself the goal of educating a person and eradicating "evil inclination" in him. A number of Confucian moral precepts concerning complete obedience to the monarch, strict observance of rituals and the position of women contributed to slowing down the development of Chinese society and strengthening conservatism in the People. Characteristically, despite its purely earthly, everyday character, Confucianism abandoned faith in spirits. It was this teaching that substantiated the position in which the Chinese woman was, blocking her access to education! and participation in public life. By consolidating and canonizing the family and social relations that already existed in everyday life at that time, Confucianism created a kind of "Chinese Domostroy". On the contrary, Buddhism, widespread among the "upper classes", where women have always enjoyed some privileges, was much more merciful to a woman, almost equating her with a man; therefore, Buddhism is very popular among Chinese women, a popularity which, however, according to the testimony of many researchers, often took the form of debauchery of Buddhist priests with "pious" parishioners-] '• mi, just as it happened in the Catholic monasteries of medieval Europe, or in the Orthodox monasteries of pre-revolutionary Russia. Oppression, suffering and humiliation have entangled the life of a Chinese woman from the very moment of her birth. Each family was anxiously awaiting the birth of a son, on whom all the aspirations and hopes of the relatives were pinned. For the education of a born boy in China, they usually do not spare money, hoping that in this way he will achieve a great career and make his family happy. The daughter, these hopes in the conditions of Chinese reality, could not justify and therefore her birth was met with deep disappointment and even grief. Mourning reigned in the family, and friends and neighbors did not bring congratulations, as is usually the case at the birth of a boy, but expressed condolences. Of course, most of all this was reflected in the unhappy mother, to whom all the guilt of the unsuccessful birth was attributed. According to many versions, even the killing of newborn girls was widespread in China; these versions suggest that the often-born girl was simply taken to the yard and left here until she either died or was picked up by one of the compassionate passers-by or neighbors. However, G. Jiles, professor of Chinese at Cam Bridge and a prominent Sinologist who has lived in China for many years, refutes the existence of such a custom. Without denying that the boy is much more desirable in the family, he at the same time believes that killing daughters would be a senseless act, since, firstly, usually all young men over 18 get married and, in addition, many men have Thus, assuming the existence of the custom of killing newborn girls, one would have to admit that female fertility in China is much higher than male, which contradicts the existing data of all countries of the world. But, although the custom of killing girls is a fiction of Europeans, however, it must be admitted with certainty that in a Chinese family the birth of a girl was always undesirable. And in the future, the girl's position in the family is unenviable; they value it less, give it less worries and attention. There is an old Chinese superstition: little boys are dressed in women's clothes in order to deceive the spirits of illness or death, who, mistaking them for girls, will not take them for themselves. After a girl is 7 years old, she is usually separated from men, she cannot eat with them, even if they are her relatives brothers. The custom of bandaging the legs was extremely difficult and painful for the Chinese girl, stopping the normal growth of the leg and turning it into a shoe that was disproportionately tiny to ugliness. This custom, which arose around the 10th century AD and appeared partly as a result of the influence of men who looked at a woman as a thing and kept her locked up, protecting her from other people's encroachments, partly resulting from the peculiar sexual aesthetics of the Chinese of that time, was very widespread in (China and still not completely obsolete. However, not everyone followed it, for example, all women of the Manchu dynasty (reigning from 1644 to 1911 AD) did not resort to bandaging and had normal legs, just as they did not bandage legs of a woman of Canton, a woman of mountain tribes, etc. At present, due to the general emancipation of a Chinese woman, the custom of "golden lilies", as they call disfigured tiny legs in China, is being eradicated as harmful, humiliating, antihygienic and completely inappropriate to the economic role of a modern Chinese woman. The next stage of this bleak life is marriage. In China, marriage is a necessary stage in the life of every woman, her inevitable fate. aryh maidens "never existed in China; the only case in which a Chinese girl did not marry was when her. sold in a "tea house" (brothel). Usually, the Chinese woman did not know her future husband and the first date with him happened at the moment when she entered her new house as a wife, where she was to live her whole life. When she got married, the girl completely broke with her family, becoming a member of her husband's family; According to old Chinese laws, the transfer by a wife of products from her husband's house to her family is one of the legitimate reasons for divorce. In her new family, the newlywed immediately falls under the authority of her husband's parents, in particular her mother-in-law: thus, the character of the latter has a great influence on the entire fate of a young woman. The situation of the wife with the birth of the first child is somewhat easier, especially if it is a boy (see above). Motherhood to some extent raised the prestige of a woman, the important mission of caring for children, lying on the mother, inspired respect for her. However, nevertheless, the woman remained in a subordinate position and even in old age, according to custom, was subordinated to the will of the eldest son. Of course, under such conditions, marriage could hardly be built on genuine feelings; in those cases when, nevertheless, this love between spouses existed, according to the unwritten code of Chinese etiquette, it was considered indecent to show such love and it had to be carefully hidden. An English researcher and missionary who lived for a long time in China, John McGowan, writes about this: “Husband and wife are always very cold to each other and you will never hear a single tender word between them. One day an English girl asked a Chinese woman if she loved her husband? This question frightened the Chinese woman and she, blushing with excitement, answered: "Of course not." Only later, in an intimate conversation, she confessed this love, but what she said to a foreigner, she would never say to any of her own mother, even her own mother. " If the young woman could not instill in Herself feelings of love for her husband, then nevertheless she had to remain faithful to him all her life, since divorce on the initiative of the wife was not allowed by Chinese laws. The husband had the right to bring back his wife who had left him by force; Fornication was punished to the fullest extent of the law, on a par with treason. The husband had the right to divorce his wife if there was one of the following seven reasons: childlessness, adultery, neglect of his parents, nagging, theft (this includes the transfer by the wife to her family of products from the husband's house (see above), jealous character and leprosy. The law stipulated that the husband loses the right to divorce if: 1) if the wife properly fulfilled the period of mourning for his parents, 2) if he became rich from the time of his marriage, 3) if the wife no longer has a family, wherever the island could Polygamy, which was very developed in old China, made the position of women even more humiliating. Most men from wealthy classrooms acquired several legal concubines. In addition, it was considered quite normal for a man leaving for a long time to acquire a new wife in a new place, whom he usually left upon returning home. Of course, under such conditions, family life in most cases for a Chinese woman was a continuous oppression, turning her into a slave to her husband and his family. The only outcome for a woman, especially suffering from family tyranny, was suicide. To commit suicide meant for an oppressed woman to get rid of1 life-long penal servitude and at the same time to take revenge on her oppressors, who were to blame for her death. Despite such a bleak life, the same inexorable moral ordered a woman to express grief violently in the event of the death of her husband. The custom requires that the widow, after the death of her husband, to with the same went to the home of her relatives, where she must lead a secluded life, eat exclusively plant foods and not part with his image. In other words, the death of a husband means a burial alive for a woman. Re-marriage was extremely difficult by custom. This is the bleak lot of women in old China.