2. The woman of the privileged classes
At the very beginning of the description of the life and everyday life of a Persian woman, it is necessary to especially highlight the woman of nomadic tribes, with her patriarchal-clan way of life. Despite the fact that she does not know the veil and harem, her whole life is subordinated to the norms of ancient life, terribly backward and conservative. According to her position and character, the Persian nomad makes up a separate group in the total mass of the female population of Persia, while the main subject of our presentation is the typical settled Persian woman, that is, actually a Persian. Moving on to considering the legal status and typical everyday features of her life (in many respects the same for all classes of the female population), it is necessary to note the most important articles of the "Sharia" (Muslim spiritual code), which regulates all aspects of the life of a Persian woman. First of all, according to the "Sharia" and According to the usual Persian law, a Persian woman can in no way be a legal entity. In short, the Persian, as interpreted by spiritual lawyers, is simply a powerless creature that does not play any role not only in public life, but even in a narrow family life. The obligatory wearing of the veil, the categorical prohibition of any communication with strangers, with the exception of one's own husband, the impossibility of using one's powers for socially useful labor, created the usual type of Persian woman — a thing suffocating in an atmosphere of ignorance and idleness. The Koran (the holy book of Muslims) speaks very little and very vaguely about a woman. Only in later times, on the basis of supposedly Qur'anic indications, did the privileged position of a man take shape. The fact is that Arab rule in Persia entailed a general belittling of the entire Persian people. In subsequent eras, in connection with the flourishing of the Persian statehood, the Persians As for the Persian women, the regime of lawlessness and oppression remains in force in the old fashioned way and thanks to the difficult economic conditions and the help of the ingenious chicanery of spiritual lawyers consistently develops and strengthens. The Persian woman is a Zoroastrian of the pre-Islamic period, i.e. In the 7th century AD, before the adoption by the Persians of the religion of the Arabs, in many respects she was freer than subsequent generations of Muslim women. A small number of adherents of the ancient Zoroastrian religion have survived to this day in Persia. They live mainly in the mountainous region. Yezda and are known as gebras. The main occupation of the gebras is trade. Their religion is imbued with mysticism and has a dualistic character. Its basis lies in the struggle between two principles — good and evil, purity and impurity. Hence, the Zoroastrians have a cult of fire as a purifying element. In the modern Hebrew woman, you can trace the difference between her and her Muslim sister. In contrast to the Persian Muslim woman, the Zoroastrian has the right to appear with an open face; they do not disdain her; she does not seem to be something unworthy and shameful, everything that a Persian woman is at the present time. General Persian conditions, of course, left their mark on the position of the Gebrian woman, in the direction of infringing on her rights, pushing her into the background, etc. However, it is necessary admit that the position of a Gebrian woman is still somewhat better than the plight of a Muslim woman. The childhood of a Persian woman is as bleak as her whole life is bleak. The four walls of "enderun" _ (the inner part of a Persian house intended exclusively for women), the gossip of harem inhabitants, grumpy and rapidly aging from a sedentary life - this is the lot of a Persian girl from more or less prosperous families. Any Persian girl from birth immediately falls into unequal conditions compared to their boy brothers. Among the Persians, it is considered unacceptable, almost a shame, to mention in a conversation, at least by chance, about a daughter who was born, about the health of his girls, etc. If you ask a Persian how many children he has, he will think for a minute, and then he will proudly name the impressive number of his offspring, referring exclusively to his sons. Girls are not taken into account; it is inconvenient to talk about them and in general they are considered something like an annoying misunderstanding, bringing nothing but trouble and grief. So we see that from the very cradle they begin to look at the Persian as a completely worthless and useless thing. From a very tender age, along with her mother's milk, the little Persian sucks in the specific atmosphere of the harem premises with a gathering of women intended exclusively for a specific purpose, women, by force of circumstances, which have become, instead of useful members of society, mere objects of male lust and amusement. A Persian girl's day passes between dusty mat with a pile of rags piled on them. They walk very rarely. The rooms where they live and sleep, often in whole batches, are darkish, badly ventilated rooms with an abundant amount of dust that firmly settles on children's lungs. Persian from 9-12 years old is already a girl of marriageable age and does not dare to appear on the street with an open face. This is the law of "Sharia" and many children's lives are inexorably driven to it, regardless of their health and capabilities. Persian girls are usually very early formed into women. The process of physical maturation in young Persian women is much faster than their intellectual development. The overwhelming majority of Persian women remain for the rest of their lives a deeply ignorant creature, indifferent to anything essential and important. The only thing that the Persian is well versed in is the simple area of ​​erotic science. Some European "researchers" who are fond of the "exoticism" of the East even try to prove that the Persian woman, by her inner structure, is exclusively intended for the role of a qualified mistress. This is her vocation, as they say, and more cannot be asked of her. Of course, all these fables about the predestination of a Persian woman are sheer nonsense. The type of woman who is a professional mistress is created not by some internal peculiarities, but by the general system of upbringing of Persian girls, who from childhood get used to looking at themselves exclusively as a living commodity. The design of such views on women and the influence of classical Persian poetry, in to a large extent imbued with a specific eroticism, which created a mystical cult of the female body and beauty. With such views on her role in society, a young Persian woman approaches the most important stage of her life, not rich in events, to marriage. According to the Koran, marriage is mandatory. All women must get married. The following forms of marriage exist in Persia: permanent marriage, that is, marriage between a free man and a woman. In this marriage, the wife, after the death of her husband, remains the heiress of all his property. Then the marriage "sige", that is, temporary, concluded for a certain period, moreover, the husband at any time has the right to release his wife before the expiration of the term, in short, simply kick out into the street. Shige is the most common form of marriage in Persia. Given the extreme ease of entering into a temporary marriage for a wide variety of periods, often just a few days, "shige" borders on prostitution. Strictly speaking, this form is prostitution legalized by the Shariah. After divorce, i.e. after the expiration of the contract, the husband is obliged to pay his wife maintenance for three months and 10 days, in case of her possible pregnancy. This ends all the obligations of a husband to his wife. "Shige" opens up a wide field for the exploitation of women. Often, a woman weighed down by need, being in a hopeless situation, is forced to conclude conditions for a temporary marriage at the lowest price and for any period. The mullahs turn a blind eye to these ugly phenomena, and thoughtfully sanction fictitious divorces without going into the essence of the matter. But even in official marriages, which are called "permanent" in Persia, a woman's rights are far from protected. The husband here is also the complete master over his wife, over her thoughts and actions. He has the opportunity to divorce her at any moment, for this he needs, as the Shari'a dictates, just turn his back on her. In case of divorce, the children remain with the father. The father also has the right not to keep his children and pass them on to some other woman for upbringing. So, according to Sharia, a girl who has reached 9 years old can be married. A marriage takes place, if it is permanent, through the conspiracy between the parents of the bride and groom. Often, right up to the wedding, the bride and groom do not know each other. The marriage code provides for many details, both an external ritual character and an internal family routine. So, for example, he obliges the husband who takes a girl of noble birth to his house, to provide her with a servant, etc. On the contrary, the pretty daughters of the poor, who fall into the harem of a rich Persian, are content with the share of the younger wife. They fall under the control of an angry and grumpy "banu" (first wife) and often suffer beatings and bullying. A Persian wedding is by its very nature not a very joyful ceremony. After all the formalities associated with the conclusion of the marriage contract, the day of the bride's move to the groom's house with all her belongings and outfits is appointed. On the same day, the ransom for the bride must be paid in money or things. The size of the ransom is set by agreement, depending on the property status of the spouses. The day of the bride's moving to the groom's house is the most solemn, they are preparing for it for a long time. In the morning in the bride's house there are feverish preparations and preparations. The procedure for the wedding gathering of the bride and groom usually takes place in the bathhouse. It should be noted that the Persian bath is not only a place where people wash, to a greater extent it has the character of a public entertainment. They sit in the baths, gossip, meet each other, relax. By the time of the “dressing” of the bride, her friends and relatives gather. They look at the bride with curiosity, admire colorful dresses, etc.intolerable hum from female voices and exclamations. Loud sobbing and crying are often heard, merging in a stream of general noise. In general, this whole ceremony has the character of a kind of "bachelorette party". Usually, in the evening, “boyfriends” come for the bride to take her to the groom's house. The hostess of the house presents a treat. Poor people often spend their last pennies on this business. Then the crying bride is put on a horse and taken to the groom. The journey is decorated very solemnly, usually accompanied by music and songs. Upon arrival, the bride is brought to the groom and, having joined their hands, are left alone in a special room. The wedding fun is in full swing by this time: women are treated in the "enderun", men are separately in the outer rooms of the house. The celebration usually lasts until late at night. At rich weddings, in addition to music, dances and songs, specially invited groups of wandering actors, magicians and dancers perform. Often at the end, fireworks are lit to complete the wedding feast. 1. Women of the mountains. Jefatanya. Polygamy, although considered the main type of family relationship in Persia, is actually not very common. According to Muslim law, every Persian has the right to take four wives and two concubines for himself, excluding "sige" wives, who are not counted. Who can maintain such a harem? - Naturally, only very rich Persians, who receive large incomes from their estates and government services, etc., can afford such a luxury. The bulk of the population, the middle classes and working people, in most cases are content with only one wife ... The exception is the observed plurality of some artisans and handicraftsmen, by the nature of their production interested in superfluous working hands. A Persian woman gets married early and grow old early. Living in harems before marriage, she learns from childhood and takes for granted her servitude. Thus, the marriage, and with it the life change that has taken place, the Persian almost does not feel. She again from one "Enderun" with his gossip and quarrels falls into another. That's all. The Persian woman's costume consists of a shirt, a jacket and a short skirt — it's for home; To go outside, the Persian woman puts on wide trousers, which are now being replaced by skirts in some places, puts a large black scarf over her head — plain or silk, called “chadur”, then a “rubande” veil of black hard gauze is put on her face, with cutouts for the eyes. Not long ago rubande were made of thick white gauze of very large sizes; they are still common in provincial towns and villages. The Persian spends most of her life within the four walls of her house. Each walk requires a special permission from the husband., Given with difficulty and reluctance. Let's see what a Persian dwelling is. A Persian city-type house is usually surrounded by an adobe wall. The house is entered by a low door with a knocker. In the middle of the yard there is a pool for water. The Persian house proper is divided into two parts - the outer "birun" and the inner "enderun". "Enderun" is a special room for women, something like a harem. Apart from the husband, only women, close relatives and doctors have access to the female half. The furnishings of the Persian house are very sparse. Rather, it is completely devoid of furniture. The only common furniture in Persian homes is a variety of mats that serve as chairs and beds. The Persians also love to decorate their houses with glass things — various candlesticks, candelabra, which are almost never used. The same can be said for Persian fireplaces. During the winter cold, they do not heat up and again carry a purely decorative service. For heating in Persian houses, there is a special device "kursi", which consists of a large woolen blanket, a table and a small brazier. Putting a burning brazier, in order to avoid a fire, on a table and wrapped in a huge blanket, the whole family warms up by the flaming coals, so they warm up during the day, and the nights are spent in the same way. The day of the Persian woman of the wealthy classes passes in complete idleness and boredom. As a rule, life in Eideroon begins early. From b hour. In the morning, the inhabitants of harems begin to wake up. With the onset of late morning dead boredom and dreary idleness reign in the Enderun. Women who have aged early from a sedentary life, half-lounging on soft mats, gossip and quarrel. These are the only social functions that are allowed to them by the "omniscient" clergy and are established by the way of life. Not to mention the Persian workers and peasant women, even among wealthy women and representatives of the aristocracy, education is spread to a minimum. According to American journalist Vincent Chiin, the Shah's wife and mother “Shahpur” (heir) can neither read nor write. Another queen, an aristocrat by birth, is barely literate. Nevertheless, women who do not particularly bother with reading have eye diseases that are almost universal. This is due to the wearing of the veil. From eternal The blood on the face of the eyes gradually deteriorates. The eye openings are small and insufficient., The visors of the hard calico, which impede the freedom of vision, are especially harmful to the eyes. Eyes from constant tension begin to water and decay. Often on the streets of Persian cities you can meet walking with an incorrect and stumbling gait of very young blind women who have lost their eyesight from the inevitable, like fate, "chadur". But that is not all. In addition to the eyes, the lungs also suffer. Tuberculosis is a constant companion of the Persian woman. This is not surprising if you remember that a Persian woman breathes a huge part of her life in the heated, unhealthy and dusty air that collects under the veil. On sultry days, when even with an open mouth there is nothing to breathe, the Persian is forced to literally suffocate in dense bedspreads, forced to breathe in the boiling atmosphere, from all sides of the enclosed space, between the mouth and the tissue inflamed like a fire. Early marriages (from the age of 9) also leave their mark on their health. On this basis, female diseases are terribly widespread among Persian women. Such is the wretched life of a Persian woman of the privileged classes, nevertheless placed in incommensurably better conditions compared to the life and life of a Persian working woman. 3. Persian working woman Persian working woman, almost from infancy, becomes the object of monstrous exploitation by something like a taciturn and submissive cash cow. The economic conditions of modern Persian life, an unusually weak and almost non-existent industry, led the working Persian woman to the need to sell her convict labor is almost for nothing. Hard and painful work without a glimpse of something better ahead, constant malnutrition, terrible illnesses - this is the lot of the Persian female worker and farm laborer. It goes without saying that no matter how dull and unenviable the life of a Persian woman of the upper classes, she in no way can it equal the almost tragic fate of a working Persian woman. A woman of the privileged classes, getting married quickly becomes dull, loses all cultural needs and, as it were, freezes in the sucking atmosphere of well-fed, almost bestial contentment. The Persian toiler, however, bears the yoke of double torture; on her shoulders she must endure the general regime of female lawlessness and oppression, plus harsh, sometimes downright overwhelming work. The girl of the Persian working masses in the full sense of the word does not know what childhood is. Even before the little peasant girl embarks on the path of hired labor, she is already performing various hard work and duties in her parents' house in the village. You can often observe the following picture - on a hot road, a tiny girl is moving, dragging a heavy basket or sack with all her might. The girl's face is covered with agonizing drops of sweat, her eyes bulge out on her forehead from tension, but she continues to walk and walk forward with touching obedience. And so from day to day. When a girl gets a little older and has 8-9 years of age behind her shoulders, she usually gets a job on rice, tea and tobacco plantations or ends up in some workshop, where, on a par with adult female comrades, she dries over painstaking and exhausting work — making a carpet. The cheapest labor in Persia is female. Only thanks to the beggarly payment of female labor could a number of industries develop in Persia, in particular, carpet. A Persian female carpet worker in Kermana in Sultanabad receives about 10 shai a day, which is about 8 kopecks. This explains the cheapness of the Persian carpet, which goes almost entirely to the foreign market. In Kerman, 7000 weavers are employed in carpet production, of which 75% are women, most of them teenage girls who receive pitiful pennies, which are not enough for basic necessities, even for a meager dinner. Women's labor is still quite widely used in the silk, brocade and match industry. A woman's working day in handicraft workshops in the summer lasts up to 16 hours. The premises of the workshops, where women have to spend most of their lives, are damp, dark and stinking cellars. The eternal lack of light, pillars of poisonous dust, monstrous mustiness, the absence of a hint of ventilation and ozonation, undermine the health of a working woman in several years. Among them, a huge number suffer from eye diseases, spoiling from work in carpets and other industries that require strong visual stress. Quite often a Persian woman, as a reward for her truly terrible work, receives eternal blindness, after which she is immediately kicked out into the street without any further ado ... After all, now she is no longer fit for anything, not even for the role of working cattle. There is nothing in Persia that resembles the protection of female or child labor. Women are completely left to the mercy of each individual entrepreneur, who is trying to somehow cut more than the beggarly wages of Persian women workers. The almost complete absence of a professional movement in Persia, in a strong step it is holding back the work of alleviating the plight of the Persian working woman. The female mass in Persia is not organized, scattered into small groups, which, of course, are unable to properly defend their vital interests. Another major factor in the defenselessness of the female laboring masses is their extreme backwardness and oppression. As we have already said, education is not always the lot, even for women of the upper classes, so where can a Persian worker and peasant woman think about it. In 1924, an attempt was made to introduce into the Majlis a requirement for a minimum labor protection, the introduction of an 8-hour working day, and improvement of conditions work in closed rooms, cutting windows in workshops, etc. The same project provided for the prohibition of the exploitation of child labor of Persian girls under 12 years old. Unfortunately, this attempt was unsuccessful. As before, to this day, Persian women workers are forced to endure unheard-of injustices and be content with ridiculously meager wages. Little better than the situation of female laborers languishing in the frenzied heat of cotton, tobacco, rice and tea plantations. Their working day stretches from early dawn, throughout the long summer day, until late at night. Sun-burned female faces and bent backs of Persians can be seen in almost all parts of Persia. In the sultry Gilan, an army of farm laborers, knee-deep in water, devoured by mosquitoes carrying malaria poison, work in the thick of it on rice plantations, receiving pitiful pennies for this, which many of them lack for their own funerals. Others languish on the cotton plantations of Khorosan, tobacco and tea plantations in the Caspian provinces. Everywhere they have the same inhuman labor - the same passive and downtrodden life. However, not all women from poor families can afford the luxury of receiving even these pitiful pennies thrown to them for their labor. Persia has a solid female unemployment rate, reaching very impressive numbers. The complete absence of developed industries where women workers could use their hands makes their position almost completely hopeless. Unemployment among Persian working women is further aggravated by the gradual proletarianization of the peasantry. More and more proletarian peasant women are looking for opportunities for application in any area. 2. Peasant labor in Persia. Their labor and strength. The original Persian production, where female labor is very widely used, namely carpet, has not come out of a state of severe crisis over the past few years. All this, of course, cannot but affect the already dreadful situation of the working Persian woman. The only salvation of a Persian working woman from the clutches of starvation is prostitution. In recent years, the percentage of female prostitution has increased significantly. The largest numbers fall on the largest cities of Persia — Tehran, Tabriz, etc. Along with female prostitution, the prostitution of teenage girls is also growing. Such are the horizons of a proletarianized Persian peasant woman, with a crooked mouth and eyes dry with sorrow, walking towards her death. As we have already indicated, the situation of a working woman in the villages in everyday life is very different from that of an urban Persian. For purely economic reasons, despite the existing prohibition, she actually walks with an open face. The scarcity of peasant and workers' dwellings does not always allow a division into external and internal (special) halves. Thus, the strict isolation of women, as is the case in cities, in villages and in the homes of poor Persians, is not always the case. In addition, the Persian poor has no harem. He has only one wife who works tirelessly. It would seem that all of the above facts should have influenced the speedy process of the emancipation of the Persian woman and her release from the quagmire of a dark and slavish existence. In reality, this is not so. The old way of life, with its view of women as a lower being, still enjoys tremendous influence and strength among the masses of the Persian people. This is facilitated, on the one hand, by the appalling ignorance of the popular masses, and on the other hand, the still not quite decayed organism of ancient economic forms, which immensely interferes with the forging of a genuine Persian proletariat, with a purely working-class self-awareness and ideology. she carries around the house; despite a lot of dirty work performed by her meekly and submissively, it is not considered a person. After getting married, she usually suffers from her husband a series of gross insults, bullying, beating and beating in abundance to her share. The Persian working woman is so beaten and belittled that it does not occur to her to protest or complain. However, there is nowhere to complain and no one. According to the spirit of the laws, a husband is an uncontrolled ruler who exercises judgment and punishment on his wife ... So, it must be admitted that the Persian toiler is not yet an active force that can stir up the swamp old way of life with its disgusting customs and mores. The leadership of the women's movement in Persia is in the hands of the thin layer of the urban intelligentsia and is still very insecure and timid.