2. Pre-revolutionary zyryanka
As a general rule, the position of women among the Zyryans has many advantages over that of women, not only among their closest neighbors, the Samoyeds, or Ostyaks, but also among the vast majority of the nationalities of the USSR. This is explained both by the living conditions and by the influences that the region suffered. The fact is that the Novgorod conquest also affected the way of life. The Novgorod woman, on the other hand, did not know the humiliating constraints in her personal and public life, which took place in the vast majority of regions of Russia. On the other hand, the Tatar conquest, which affected the position of the Russian woman and led her to prison imprisonment, passed by the edge. In addition to, however, these historical conditions, the whole environment of life and the need for a stubborn struggle with nature, in which women played an important role, determined the achievement of a certain degree of independence by the Zyryan woman and provided her with the necessary energy. Spending most of the time outside the home — in the summer fishing and hunting, in the winter hunting — the Zyryan would shift all the work of housekeeping and even agricultural labor to the woman, who thus got used to an independent position. True, this independence was acquired at the cost of extremely hard work, but for that he also provided Zyryanka with a certain amount of respect and independence and saved her from the contemptuous attitude of the male population, which her closest neighbors, the Samoyed and Ostyachka, experience on themselves. favorable conditions do not mean favorable ones yet. And if we leave aside the comparison, the objective conditions of the existence of the pre-revolutionary zyryanka made it extremely difficult to equalize her in rights with a man, or rather, completely excluded this possibility. Not to mention the negative impact of Moscow customs on the life and position of the Zyryan woman, or the rather strong influence of the Old Believers in the region, who fled from religious persecution, and, of course, brought here their despotic treatment of a woman with them - the difficult working conditions left no room for a planned struggle for the final emancipation of women. Legal and economic regulations also made it impossible for Zyryanka to secure its independence. The head of the family has always been the husband, who was considered the owner of the house, land and all property, sometimes receiving the wife’s property as a dowry. And although Zyryanka, as we mentioned above, very often ran the household on her own, her husband remained its actual owner, on whose side, in the event of any conflict, both the law and public opinion were. In addition, in Zyryansk life there existed, and has not been obsolete to this day, a number of shy rules that isolate a woman from participation in public life and consolidate her subordinate position in relation to her husband. We now try to trace the life of the pre-revolutionary zyryanka in its most important and typical moments. * ** The Zyryan had a daughter. The birth of any child is a joy for the family, for a worker will grow out of him, extremely valuable in the extremely small population of the region. And since the Zyryan woman is famous all around as an unusually energetic and enterprising worker, and, moreover, according to the unanimous public opinion, is endowed with exceptional physical beauty, her appearance does not cause the feeling of disappointment that occurs among the Samoyeds or Ostyaks. And although the Zyrian prefers his son to his daughter, because the latter will leave the family sooner or later, this does not affect the child. Maternal care remains the same, and the father, when he is at home, no, no, and fondles his daughter. The situation in which a girl spends the first years of her life naturally depends on the degree of material well-being of her parents. In wealthier families, food is better, clothing is warmer, and the room is more spacious and cleaner than that of the poor. And the mother, who has the opportunity to shift part of the work, and in any case the most difficult, onto the shoulders of laborers or laborers, devotes more time and care to the child. For the poor, the conditions of the initial upbringing are terrible. In a cold, semi-smoked hut, a child early learns to appreciate the warmth of the beds, and almost never leaves, crawling alone or under the dubious supervision of older brothers or sisters; often it falls from there. Hygienic conditions also leave much to be desired, for with continuous hard work, the mother has little time to keep the hut clean, although there are aspirations for this. The child first feeds on maternal milk, then on reindeer or cow's milk, if there is one, and very early goes to the food of adults, with the inevitable "swing" among the poor, which is extremely difficult for his physical development. It is not surprising, therefore, that there is a large percentage of mortality among children and various kinds of diseases, which are also treated primarily with quackery. The child speaks his native language at home. In this respect, zyryanka was especially distinguished by its stubborn resistance to Russifiers the policy of tsarist Russia, and did not allow her children, and especially girls, to learn Russian. Among women, many did not know the Russian language at all, which they perceived as the language of enslavers, predatory officials who always tried to offend a defenseless native. From an early age, a growing girl was involved in work, often difficult. First, she helps the mother in cleaning the room, then cooking, sewing dresses, caring for livestock, and supervising small children. In winter she carries firewood into the house, in summer she drives cattle to pasture. And already from the same years it is surrounded by pictures of a harsh and majestic panorama of forests, advancing from all sides on arable land lying on the banks of the river. Her psyche is influenced by stories about devil, water and all kinds of devils with which she is scared and faith in which she retains until death. Although, in general, as we noted above, public education and literacy among the Zyryans is at a relatively high level, the girl was very rarely sent to study, so that girls made up 15% of all schoolchildren. The inequality of position compared to boys affects not only education. Already from a young age, a somewhat contemptuous attitude towards women begins to be shaded, which, however, does not take on those exceptionally ugly forms that it has among the Samoyeds or Ostyaks. The boy early learns to consider his participation in hunting or fishing as something that distinguishes him very favorably from women's labor. And although, for example, the Zyryanskaya girl already rides well, she is still far from the “heroism” of a boy who spends the winter months with her father in the forest on the hunt. However, while the girl still lives in the family, this inequality does not affect so sharply. That is why, growing up, onance. in a hurry to get married, the pre-Komi woman, reading to look around first and choose a husband according to her heart. To the honor of the Zyryans, one must include the fact that forced marriage has almost no place in them: marriages are concluded on the basis of a voluntary agreement, in which love attraction plays an important role. The latter occurs during the well-known Zyryan "sit-downs" where mainly young people gather. At these "sit-downs", where beer plays an important role, love interests often turn into love affairs. The latter, i.e. premarital relationships are generally extremely common in the region and very often turn into marriage. In contrast to these seemingly extremely "easy" morals, a zyryanka in marriage, as a rule, remains true to her affection and marital "adultery" almost does not take place. As for premarital sexual relations, the Zyryan public looks at them very condescendingly. Even their parents don't usually judge them. If this relationship leads to childbirth, the child is willingly accepted into the family, so that, for example, infanticide is completely absent. The number of "illegitimate" in the region before the revolution was relatively extremely high, especially since Christianity did not manage to consolidate in the popular consciousness the idea of ​​the necessity and sanctity of the church marriage rite. Ancient "kissing engagement" and "weddings around the broom bush" are much more popular than matchmaking and weddings. The latter usually only reinforces the former. This freedom of sexual relations is dictated in all likelihood by a biological factor, that is, the desire to save the tribe from extinction. It is also interesting to note that in wedding songs, as a rule, there are no Russian words at all, while the Russian influence in songs and folk tales in general is extremely strong. Very rarely Zyryanka does not get married. Above, we have already noted the physical attractiveness of Zyryan women. Since the idea of ​​female beauty, and indeed of beauty in general, is, of course, highly conventional, indisputable only within the limits of a given racial or tribal type, we make this statement on the basis that the opinions of all nationalities living in the region agree on it. or adjacent to it. Both a Russian settler, a Samoyed, and a Vologda resident gladly marry a homely Zyryanka, and often strive stubbornly for this. Such marriages of Zyryanka women, even with Samoyeds, are quite common. The only exception are the Ostyaks, the marriage of Zyryanka with whom is a completely isolated phenomenon. The reason for this lies in the forms of family life among the Ostyaks that are completely unacceptable for Zyryans, determined by the firmly preserved clan system and the painful restrictions imposed by the latter on a woman. Let us cite the following fact as a typical illustration. During the civil war, when the region was partially affected by the Kolchak front, one Zyryanka married an Ostyak, and this marriage was carried out by means of escape. Her father offered a ransom for her in the amount of 50 deer queens, which at that time was a fortune. Having married, the zyryanka begins a new life. Although she runs the entire household, helps her husband, and often independently performs all agricultural work, until complete equality in relations between mu press and wife far away. If, in general, family relations are relatively mild, the husband is still the head of the house, and everyday life gives him the right to teach his wife, right up to teaching with a hand or a club. And if, unfortunately, the husband loves to drink and has a cruel disposition, then the situation of the zyryanka changes dramatically for the worse. It should be noted, however, that such facts are isolated phenomena. The inequality of a woman in rights with a man manifested itself especially sharply in pre-revolutionary times only in her almost complete isolation from public life. This participation existed among Zyryanka only in the form of personal influence on their husbands. Some way out for the highly developed social instincts of the Zyryanka was the organization of a kind of female community around the baths, which the Zyryans took over from the Russians and became extremely widespread in Zyryan everyday life. These peculiar pre-revolutionary "clubs" knew special women's days, when the entire female population came together not only to wash, but mainly to talk, and the main topics of conversation were, of course, topical events. At these meetings, the Zyryan women received some social skills and at them a woman's attitude to certain facts or persons of the village community was formulated, which was of no small importance for the whole village. As for the everyday life, the working life of a Zyryan woman, we have already talked about it. She accounts for all the housework, helping her husband in agriculture, or even independently running an agricultural economy, and all the worries of raising children. These few words embrace the enormous deception of work, which allows her only with difficulty to snatch a few free minutes a day, and sometimes deprives her of any rest except a few hours of sleep. 2. Zyryansk swing. The attitude of children to their parents is somewhat patriarchal. In any case, until his death, the father retains the dominant position in the family, and the children in almost everything obey him, unless, of course, they are allocated to an independent household or the father does not lose the ability to lead the house due to decrepitude and weakness. The mother also retains the care and respect of her children to death. We have tried to give a brief outline of the life of the pre-revolutionary zyryanka. Of course, there are many individual differences due to both the degree of material security and some local characteristics. The richer the Zyrian, the closer his household approaches the kulak type, the more freedom his wife gets. She, naturally, gets great opportunities for development, sometimes degenerating, however, into despotism, unless the head of the family warned her in this regard. On the other hand, the wife of a poor man finds herself in extremely difficult conditions, under which, for example, she has to, in addition to housework, work at the fist, enduring cruel exploitation, nagging, and oppression from the owners. Let us note the Izhemsky, which plays in the region the same role that is attributed to Yaroslavsky in Great Russia. Izhem-tsy — industrialists and merchants — are distinguished by the greatest entrepreneurial spirit, however, somewhat of a kulak shade, and in any case they represent the most prosperous part of the Zyryan population in the entire region. As for the women in Izhma, they have a peculiar difference from the rest of the female population of the region. The absence of "sit-downs" and the small number of premarital, if not extramarital affairs, explained by the strong influence of the hypocritical morality of the official Russian public and the Old Believers' way of life, earned them the reputation of "moral" women. On the other hand, there is also a certain increase in female enslavement, which is also explained by the influence of the Samoyed ideology, whom the Izhemtsy mercilessly exploit by trading methods and the use of their labor, and by other conditions. In any case, there is a somewhat accentuated, in comparison with other areas, contempt for a woman, in which, for example, she is not even allowed to attend men's gatherings or feasts. Finishing this brief description of the life and living conditions of the pre-revolutionary zyryanka and moving on to the question We consider it necessary to remind the reader once again of some geographical and historical facts reported at the beginning of this brochure about the position of Zyryanskaya women under Soviet rule. This is, firstly, the extreme remoteness of the region from the central industrial and cultural points of our Union and the complete absence of railways that would allow us to establish the necessary economic and cultural ties, and the heavy burden of tsarism, which left a legacy of mistrust and hostility of the oppressed national masses towards the Russians, who appeared to them in truly disgusting forms - a merchant, a factory owner and a police officer. This, as well as a relatively short period of time when the Soviet Union could start systematic work, must be borne in mind when we talk about the achievements of the revolution in the issue of the situation in Zaryanskaya women.