2. A woman of the tribes of the Kamchatka-Chukchi Territory
Let us now turn to the living conditions in which indigenous peoples live, and in particular to the role and position of the indigenous woman in everyday life. Let's start with the settled Kamchadals. As mentioned above, at present, the Kamchadals, unlike their northern neighbors, are a completely Russified nationality. These are no longer the most ancient inhabitants of the island, Itelmens, nomads and warriors, but, however, they are not Russians either, since, on their part, the newcomers were very strongly influenced by the native life, language, costume and religion. This new group retained the old name of the Kamchadals. The ancient religious ideas of the natives formally gave way to Christianity, which was intensively implanted here by Orthodox missionaries, but the allotment continued to exist and live in a latent form in the psychology and everyday life of the Kamchadals. According to the testimony of the first travelers to Kamchatka: Krasheninnikov, Steller, Golovnin and other Kamchadals still in the past centuries, i.e. until the wave of Russian colonization had not yet completely swept over them, they lived in exactly the same way as all the northern nomadic tribes; Their dwelling was an earthen yurt; it was erected on four pillars (and outside was lined with turf and earth. Unlike the Koryatsk yurt (see below), the dwelling of the ancient Kamchadal had a special extension with an exit door through which only women and children were allowed to exit in winter. however, to this day, there were hunting and fishing. They lived in one place as long as there was an abundance of animals and fish. These reserves were depleted and Kamchadal left his camp, migrated to another area and settled there. Sometimes on one and the same area was claimed by other tribes, then heated battles flared up and the camp fell to the victor. In the village of Kamchadals, unimaginable dirt reigned. In yurts, from furs and skins, dirt, dogs, etc., there was a heavy stench. Neither face nor hands of Kamchadals were washed Women were particularly unclean. Kamchadalka ate from the same dish with the dogs, slept in her fur clothes. At the same time, she had an extreme addiction to trinkets and ornaments; painted her face with bright] paints and painted her lips. The same researchers note that the Kamchadals were particularly promiscuous in terms of sex: all their religious ideas, ceremonies, songs, dances were imbued with this basic element of sensuality. Therefore, a woman from ancient times was here in the position of a valuable thing. In order to get her favorite trinkets and embroidered fur garments, the Kamchadal warriors started incessant wars with the Koryaks and other neighbors. Their religion was typical primitive paganism. At the head of all that exists, according to their ideas, was the creator of the universe, the god Kutha; at the same time, all natural phenomena, all the elements surrounding them seemed to them inhabited by various spirits: in the water lived a mermaid - "Kamak", in the forest dwarfs - "Pikhlyach", etc. Wanting to appease them, Kamchadals turned to shamans, priests, to the spirit spellcasters and healers who, whirling in a stunned dance, muttered and shouted magic incantations, and the people believed that then the shaman enters into direct Communication with the deity and can achieve the fulfillment of all desires from him. It was often possible to observe how the Kamchadal beats the idol, the supreme god Kutku himself, with a belt, taking revenge on him for the fact that his request remained unheard. The same travelers, referring to their observations, assert that the Kamchadals, among all the foreign tribes they met, were distinguished by the lowest cultural level; they were rude and extremely sloppy. These are brief information about the life of the first inhabitants of the peninsula. The present Kamchadals, of course, are not the same. Russification and mixing with other races affected everyday life. However, until very recently it would have been difficult to find cultural achievements or signs of material well-being in the living conditions of these new Kamchadals. The bulk of Kamchadals moved away from nomadic life and moved to a sedentary lifestyle. This sedentary zone stretches to Tigil; here the area of ​​wooden huts, settled dwellings ends, and the nomadic country of yurts begins again. Then the Koryaks live, a tribe that has largely preserved its identity and faithful to the nomadic way of life. Having passed from nomadic life to settled life, the Kamchadals still remained true to their former occupations. All their economic activities are limited to hunting and fishing. Of course, the reasons for this lie in the very natural conditions of Kamchatka. Farming is almost impossible here, livestock raising is also very difficult: there are no good forage grasses. At the same time, the interest, which has long been shown by foreigners to local furs and products of sea fishing, prompts the natives to exterminate animals and fish more and more intensively. Kamchadals became so close to this life of a hunter and fisherman that they began to look disdainfully and with contempt at agricultural labor. The woman in the Kamchadal village is no longer the one depicted in the above descriptions of the traveler. in. Everyone who had to mine in Kamchatka for a decade unanimously affirms that today's Kamchadals do not have a trace of that sexual promiscuity, which, according to Krasheninnikov, was the main character trait of Kamchadals. There is no such carelessness, idleness, and greed, which were attributed to them. The bulk of Kamchadals live by hard, dangerous and exhausting labor associated with the profession of a hunter and fisherman. Women, as elsewhere, mainly do housework, look after the children, heat the hut, and repair the nets. The only type of agriculture that has partly taken root in Kamchatka is truck farming, also for the most part the lot of women. Potatoes, turnips, carrots, cabbage, radishes, beets, etc. are sown here. The influence of the newcomer Russian element also affected the appearance of the Kamchadalka. She stopped painting her face and replaced her former native costume, a description of which will be given below, with the clothes of a Siberian Russian peasant woman. However, unlike the last Kamchadalka, she could not get addicted to needlework, artistic embroidery, for which Russian villages in the North are famous. The position of a woman among the Kamchadals hardly differs from that of a woman among the same Siberian Russian peasants. However, the living conditions here are even more difficult, poverty and scarcity are much more acute, and therefore the Kamchadalka is much more crowded, ignorant and dark. Her whole life is spent in a disgusting stinking hut. Huts of Kamchadals; cobble together somehow, on; living thread; There is a constant acute shortage of building materials, because the conditions for the development and delivery of timber are extremely difficult. Therefore, you have to build a hut from what is at hand: here are old half-rotted boards and disassembled boxes, etc. They are drowned "in black", that is, smoke is emitted through a special hole made in the ceiling. From this in the hut there is always caustic, suffocating smoke, and at the same time it does not get warm enough. Even for a Kamchadala man, who spends most of the day outside the house, engaged in hunting or fishing, fishing, and besides being more hardy, life in such a hut should be very difficult and harmful. What to say about the woman who has to spend the whole day in this terrible environment, or about the children who grow up here? Of course, this has a very difficult effect on their health, entails frequent illnesses, early old age and colossal mortality. In addition to cold, damp dampness and smoke, the distinctive feature of the Kamchadal dwelling is striking dirt. The walls and ceiling are densely smoked, and the floor is infested with vermin. On the same floor, the inhabitants of the hut sleep, hiding behind dirty rags. It is never light in the hut. Very often you come across huts in which there are no glass, instead of their windows covered with fish skin or a bear's bubble. -H-They eat very badly here too. The food is uniform, mostly fish. Tea with sugar is a rarity here, yes; there is very little even bread. As with other tribes inhabiting the region, skin and eye diseases are very common among Kamchadals. It is quite clear that under such living conditions scabies, eczema, trachoma, tuberculosis are rampant here. In addition, the most terrible scourge of these places are venereal diseases, introduced partly by the Cossack settlers and. Russian merchants, partly foreigners. These diseases are especially terrible here, since until recently there was no satisfactory medical> assistance. The main healers were local healers, who, of course, did everything to kill the patient more accurately. All this, of course, was the most difficult for the woman. When she got married, she very often immediately became infected from her husband. If she was cured somehow, as a result, serious female diseases remained. The situation in which the birth of the Kamchadalka took place is the most terrible. There is, of course, no question of a doctor's help. Sometimes, far from often, they turned to their grandmother for help. There was no rest after childbirth. The same exhausting work, the same dirt, cold, insects awaited the exhausted, sick woman. As a result: in the worst case, death from childbirth, in most cases, a serious illness, which may not have been paid attention to, but which sooner or later made itself felt. This is the life in which a woman of a sedentary part of the population has to live, almost completely Russified and only adopted something from the everyday life of neighboring nomadic tribes. We will not dwell on the descriptions of the life of Kamcha-Dalka for a long time, since this sedentary group is not particularly typical. It is much more interesting, therefore, to dwell in more detail on other peoples of the Kamchatka-Chukotka Territory, since here we are dealing with certain, pronounced national characteristics, almost completely untouched by Russian influence. Let's start with the Koryaks. In essence, the Koryak group, according to a number of serious ethnographic researchers, is in very close relationship with the Kamchadals. This is especially true of the so-called "sedentary Koryaks", that is, living along the seashore but also leading a semi-sedentary lifestyle. As for the other branch, the so-called "reindeer Koryaks," that is, nomads, who are mainly engaged in hunting and reindeer herding, then they, in all likelihood, are also closely related to the wandering Chukchi, their northern neighbors. The difference between these two branches affects the structure of the dwelling and the way of life, in particular, in relation to women. While sedentary Koryaks live in small coastal villages, where tribal ties are gradually weakening and the whole way of life and system almost do not differ from the way of Kamchadal, that is, Russified villages, "reindeer" Koryaks, as well as nomadic Ris. 1. Women in a yurt. Vye Chukchi, almost entirely preserved the primitive nomadic system. Until very recently, tribal life reigned here, its own tribal customary law, tribal court. At the head of the clan was the clan chief, the prince, the sovereign ruler of the camp, he was at the same time (the richest of his kind, and before the revolution his authority was reinforced by the recognition and help of the Russian authorities. The yurt of the settled Koryak is extremely reminiscent of the Kamchadal hut; it develops made of logs as follows: a frame is established on four main pillars, above it is another frame, fixed on abutments, and a ceiling is laid on top of it, in the middle of which a quadrangular hole is made. This hole performs a triple role: smoke from the heating hearth escapes through it ;, together with rem, it serves as an entrance and exit for the inhabitants of the yurt in winter and, finally, it is the only source of light in the yurt.In addition to this entrance, each such yurt also has a side corridor extension with a round window in the ceiling and an entrance But this door can only be used in summer, while since the beginning of winter it is tightly closed, and the only entrance is the upper smoke hole ruff. This custom, in all likelihood, stems from the climatic conditions of the region: the harsh winter and the fragility of the nomadic dwelling prompts the native to be especially careful with the heat and not let it out from the yurt. Therefore, in winter, a corridor with a door and a window is closed so as not to let the cold into the house anymore. By this opening and closing of the front door, the Koryaks mark the change of seasons. With the onset of summer, when the first boat is launched, the Koryaks celebrate and solemnly open the front door. A short northern summer passes, the sea is covered with ice, the kayak is again raised ashore, and then the ceremony of closing the door again until next summer. The Kamchadals' front door is also closed in winter, but not for everyone. There, an exception is made for women and children, and Koryachka does not enjoy this privilege. Busy with various household chores, she has to climb the pillar many times to reach the smoke hole. Often she has to rise and fall with a heavy load: brushwood, water, dishes, etc. Grasping the pillar with her left hand, She supports her load with her right hand And in this position she 'climbs Along the notches of the pillar !,.' Or slides down along it . In wandering "reindeer Koryaks", the yurts are not made of boards, but consist of several thin poles covered with skins. When the Koryak leaves the encampment, he puts his yurt on special large sledges (sleighs) and thus transports it to a new place.1I A Koryak woman differs very little in appearance from a Kamchadalka, she has no pronounced features of the Mongolian type. Most of them are sluggards of average height, or rather tall than short, of a dense build, the outlines of the face are correct, without the usual flattened nose and prominent wide cheekbones, which are usual for northern foreigners. Koryachka's costume consists of a solid fur bag, which is put on from the bottom and tied around the neck. The lower part of this costume is sewn from multi-colored longitudinal stripes, giving the costume colorful and picturesque. This costume is worn directly on the naked body; at home, women put on another fur shirt over it, the so-called kukhlyanka with a high dog collar, or more often with a hood; on the back of such a kuhlyanka, various straps with beads, tassels and other decorations are usually hemmed. In the summer, the Koryachka does not put on a small bag and is limited only to wide trousers and a kukhlyanka. The k'a kuhlyanka department is the most painstaking, complex and artistic work of the Koryak woman's needlework. This decoration, called "upovana", is a narrow embroidered border along the hem of the kuhlyanka. Hopefully it is either sewn from multi-colored leather strips, or it is embroidered on a colored plush with garus and silk, etc. Embroidery is hoped for is an incredibly difficult, painstaking and cunning work. The pattern of embroidery, decoration, is usually extremely intricate, and therefore, if you carefully and painstakingly do the work, you need to spend a lot of time; and for the entire long 'polar winter' a woman manages to make no more than two hopes. Like the women of neighboring indigenous peoples, the Koryachka is addicted to various decorations. Koryachka especially loves all kinds of beads, beads and various metal plaques. From deep antiquity Until recently, the custom of painting and tattooing the face was kept. Tattooing is usually done by a woman when she gets married, which gave rise to some researchers to explain this custom by the desire of jealous Koryaks to protect their wives from the encroachment of other people's men. The way in which sailor women tattoo, or as they say here, "embroider" their faces, is the most barbaric; the thread smeared with soot is held in the skin, the soot remains, and the thread is then smeared again and passed under the skin next to it. As a result, black spots in the form of circles or wide stripes are formed on the forehead and on the face, extending from the corners of the mouth to the auricles. It must be said that this most harmful and savage custom has been gradually getting rid of in recent years under the influence of a more cultured sedentary part of the population, but nevertheless, even now one can find more than one woman in the Koryak nomad camps, sporting such an ornament. The position of women among the Koryaks is much more difficult than among the Kamchadals. In general, if you look closely at the everyday life and characteristics of northern foreigners, you can also notice the difference in the position of women among the settled and nomadic tribes. While among the sedentary natives, whether they are Kamchadals, sedentary Koryaks, or coastal Chukchi (see below), a woman is in relatively favorable conditions, enjoys the right of a family member and is the same person as a man; among nomads, she a dumb animal that lives in dire conditions and is abused. Among the nomadic Koryaks, this is perhaps more pronounced than among others. Koryak dumps all the hard work on his wife, leaving only the main and basic occupations for himself: hunting and fishing. A woman is obliged to transport and install a yurt, sew clothes and shoes, dress leather and furs, embroider, spread, dry and fold fish, prepare food, skin the carcass of a dead deer and even graze a reindeer herd. When a Koryak family sits down to eat, a woman remains on the sidelines, she has no right to sit with men, and only when they are satisfied, she is given the right to collect the lunches left by them. She is often beaten and tortured by her husband. That is why, by the age of 30, the Koryachka becomes an ugly, downtrodden, deep old woman, burdened, in addition, by serious ailments. The food here is scarce and monotonous: boiled venison, sun-dried fish, berries and mushrooms. Such nutrition, especially for a woman, is far from sufficient in the harsh, polar climate. When a girl grows up, she gets married, but there is no such forced marriage as in the East, where parents marry off their daughter to someone they like. Here the girl is almost always free in her choice. Polygamy exists here; almost every Koryak takes two wives for himself, but no more; he usually takes a third wife only when one of the first wives dies. The marriageable age of a Koryak girl begins at the age of 15, but at the same time quite! the custom is widespread to marry little girls of 5-6 years old, who after a few years move to their husband's canopy. According to custom, two brothers cannot marry two sisters; Besides, there is a very interesting custom, according to which, “if the elder brother dies, then the younger one is obliged to marry his widow; the nephew must do the same in the event of the death of an uncle, even if he is 8-10 years old. In general, the Koryaks are less sexually licentious than most of the peoples of the Far North. However, here, too, pagan holidays are accompanied by "kamlanie" of shamans, calling out spirits, a general ritual dance, are erotic in nature and very often result in mass debauchery. In relation to religion, there are quite significant differences between the wandering and sedentary Koryaks. Both those and other shamanists; but the importance of shamans among the sedentary Koryaks is incomparably greater than among the nomadic ones. The hallmark of sedentary religion is their belief in an afterlife. According to their beliefs, the soul of people who lived on earth well and honestly, after death, receives a dwelling in Heaven, near the Master of the universe, Akhybnin (or Ankhgan), there it has an abundance of food and large herds of white deer, while sinners will suffer. Sinners, in their opinion, are considered: those who engaged in magic or damage to people, troublemakers, slanderers and adulterers. Wandering Koryaks, although they also recognize the master of the universe, bearing their name — Etynmalyan, do not attach much importance to it and have absolutely no idea about the belief in the afterlife. Religious dances and songs of the Koryaks are extremely interesting and characteristic. These dances are based on the primitive sense of theatricality; they are distinguished by an abundance of comic, most often imitative element: a dancing Koryak depicts scenes of hunting, domestic life, etc., with facial expressions and gestures. and healers, to whom the Koryaks turn to in case of illness or childbirth. The shaman usually does not give medicine, but shaman over the sick, driving away evil spirits from them and attracting good ones. Help is considered especially important shamans during difficult childbirth. In general, the conditions of childbirth for all the natives of the Far North are extremely difficult. Usually a grandmother or an old man is present during childbirth, but often the woman in labor is left to herself. The squirrel gives birth standing or in a knee-elbow position, her stomach is pulled together with a rag, and if a child is born with his head, then this is considered a good omen, and a woman is considered good. If with feet, then the mother is sinful and bad. It is clear that under such conditions death from childbirth is a very frequent occurrence, and women's diseases are widespread. " The mortality of children is also great. Finally, in order to complete the sketch of the everyday life of the indigenous tribes of the extreme Northeast, we turn to the Chukchi, who differ from the tribes already considered. Like the Koryaks, the Chukchi are also divided into two main groups — coastal (sedentary) and reindeer (nomadic). The coastal Chukchi live on the coast of the Chukchi Peninsula, they exist exclusively by sea trades: fishing, hunting for beavers, fur seals, walrus and seals. Reindeers roam the peninsula with their herds and their only occupations are reindeer herding and hunting. In their way of life, they differ very little from the closely related nomadic Koryaks, but they, even more than the latter, retained the features of the primitive nomadic system. They live in yurts made of reindeer skins, which are carried from place to place when the Chukchi migrate from one pasture to another. Just like the wandering Koryaks, the reindeer Chukchi roam in childbirth. Shamanism continues to dominate the Chukchi to this day; Along with shamanism, there are a number of religious customs characteristic of the earliest and most primitive forms of paganism: for example, during a blizzard or some road troubles, the Chukchi unharms their advanced dogs from the sleds and (sacrifices them to appease the elements Sacrifices are made in the same way to feed the moon, which the Chukchi consider a deity. The life of the nomadic Chukchi camp flows monotonously and meagerly. Men hunt, graze deer, women, as always, all day in housework. Here, the complete lack of rights of women stands out even more sharply. of a nomadic Chukchi — a wife is a thing, and it does not even occur to him that she can be considered the same person as himself.When a guest comes to the Chukchi tent and stays to spend the night, the amiable host, having fed and heated him, treats him to his wife. This custom of Chukchi hospitality clearly speaks of how a Chukchi woman lives. A Chukchi girl before marriage freely converges with men, and this is not considered a crime, or pos Orom, as in a Russian village. V Chukchi lack the morality of the capitalist society, according to which a woman should be faithful to her husband all her life. However, there are also many negative sides. Sexual relations are of a purely anarchic nature. The nomadic Chukchi are usually not Fig. 2. The camp migrates has more than two wives, but this does not prevent him from completely free and openly satisfying his sexual needs. The wife, however, is mainly an economic concept: she is an assistant, without whom it is difficult to do without in cattle-breeding and nomadic farming. If a poor Chukchi wants to marry the daughter of a rich owner, he must pay the ransom for her with his own labor. For 5 or even 10 years such a poor man tirelessly works for a stranger in order to get a wife. The pasture becomes scarce, and then the Chukchi camp migrates to another place. A line of light sledges with a long harness of northern hardy dogs is being built, camp houses are piled here - yurts, skins, deer carcasses, frozen fish - all the meager property of a nomad, and this train rushes along the endless tundra, constrained by the burning polar cold, in search of a new camp, a new stern. Even to this day, the cruel custom of the polar nomads has survived and lives on: when an old man reaches a ripe old age, his son kills him so that he would not be a burden to himself or to others. This custom has acquired an almost religious significance and almost always (accompanied by the "kamlani" of the shaman and ritual dances. In general, the Chukchi have a very great addiction to rituals and holidays; moreover, all these religious songs and dances are distinctly erotic in color. II Completely different The painting depicts the life of the coastal or sedentary Chukchi. This group lives on the coast, often visited by American whaling and merchant ships. It also communicates with the Americans permanently living on the Chukchi Peninsula. Every spring, schooners and longboats from America come here from America. Off the Chukchi coast, Americans they beat the whales, inside the mainland their agents are attracted by furs, fish, gold, which they claim are abundant here.The thirst for profit prompts them to establish close ties with the native population in order to bypass and oppose the orders of the authorities with its help. win the support of the dark and semi-wild Chukchi. here the schooner brings in abundance of trinkets and alcohol, soldering the entire population without exception. Often foreigners take Chukchi women on ships, and when autumn comes and the time comes for us to sail home, to America, Chukchi women are landed on the shore, leaving them nonsense gifts: like beads or bright colored fabrics. This is considered in the order of things, and the Chukchi are never jealous of their women to foreigners. But undoubtedly, this communication with the Americans played a certain role in the penetration of some elements of civilization into the environment of the coastal Chukchi. In any case, their way of life is much higher than that of the reindeer Chukchi or Koryak. The coastal Chukchi are excellent sailors: on light canoes and longboats, they embark far into the Open Ocean; many have even learned to control the motor. So they often sail To the shores of America, to the Alaska peninsula, where their kindred Eskimos live. And the American Eskimos are already very much touched by civilization: many of them were educated in large cities of the United States and became doctors, lawyers, etc. Of course, this communication also affects the change in the way of life of the Chukchi. Therefore, a woman near the coastal Chukchi feels much less humiliated and downtrodden. She is much more developed, she has self-esteem, and she strives to win her proper place in the family. It is interesting to note that the Chukchanka has a certain influence on the family structure of the neighboring Koryaks. Previously, the Koryaks lived in an extremely closed manner and, trying to preserve the purity of their blood, avoided mixed marriages. Already in the last century, this principle gradually began to get rid of, and cases of marriages between Koryaks and Chukchan women became more frequent. Getting into a Koryak family, built on a dismissive and cruel attitude towards a woman, a Chukchi woman (of course, from the sedentary Chukchi) brings in some more cultural element, defends her rights, fights against the tyranny and despotism inherent in a Koryak man. A prominent researcher of this region, Dr. N. V. Slyunin cites the following observation: “We saw one young family of a Koryak and a Chukchi woman, whose nice relations on the basis of equality interested us greatly. The father of this Koryak was a stern despot of the former temperament and demanded that his son take a second wife and thus be freed from the influence of the first; The Chukchi woman flatly refused to give in and convinced her husband of this, threatening otherwise to stab herself and her first-born son. ”By this example, one can understand that women from the group of settled Chukchi are already at a much higher stage of development than others. However, in general, the position of women of the indigenous tribes of the Kamchatka-Chukotka Territory is very bleak.