2. The woman of Georgia before the Soviet regime
Moving on to the position of a Georgian woman, it is necessary, first of all, to note the sharp line that separates a Georgian city dweller from a Georgian peasant woman. A Georgian city dweller who has lived a common life with Russia for more than a century has become so Europeanized that she is almost indistinguishable from a Russian city dweller. “She also studies in secondary and higher educational institutions, is engaged in medicine, law, teaching and research, lives and works in the same social and labor conditions, not differing in any way from a Russian city dweller. Therefore, in this essay we mean a Georgian peasant woman , especially a Georgian woman in the remote corners of Georgia. Under the general name of a Georgian one should understand not only the women of Georgia proper (Imeretin, Kartalinia, Kakheti), but also Khevsureti, Pshavia, Tu-shetia, Svaneti, etc. Only the woman of Adjara stands somewhat apart True, in ethnological terms, the Adjarians are the same Georgians-Kartvelians as the closely related Gurians.However, the four-century rule of Turkey (from the 16th to the second half of the 19th century) radically changed the entire social structure of the Ajarians, instilled in them Islam and Turkic not only their way of life, but to a large extent even their language.The position of the Adjarian woman, thanks to this, before the October Revolution, was extremely similar to that of placement of women in other Muslim countries, for example, in Turkey. In view of this peculiar 'provision of the .jarka, it is not considered in this article. As for the woman of Abkhazia, she cannot be considered here, since the Abkhaz are not Kartvelians and in terms of language, social structure and way of life are extremely close to the neighboring mountain tribes of the Circassians - (Adyge). The same applies to the women of another people inhabiting multinational Georgia, namely to the Ossetians of the Goriyoki district (in the south of Ossetia). Naturally, depending on the surrounding nature, on how the historical and socio-economic destinies of one or more another tribe inhabiting the mountains and valleys of Georgia, the character of a woman was formed, her role and significance in the family and society was established.The position of a Georgian woman in Georgia proper, understanding by this name, as already mentioned, Kakheti, Kartalinia, Imereti and Guria, is significantly different from the position of such in the rest of the East. First of all, it is necessary to note the relatively high level of culture of the population of Georgia, especially in its western part, where literacy reaches almost 5Oy / o. True, the percentage of literate women is lower than the percentage of literate men, nevertheless, it is several times higher than the percentage of literacy in any eastern country. For a hundred years of Russian power in Georgia, the normalization of marriage, property, etc., has been firmly established. no difference in this respect between the position of the Georgian peasant woman and the Russian one living on the territory of the RSFSR. In everyday life, in the sense of customary law, the position of a Georgian woman is even better than that of a Russian woman: she is more independent and freer than a Russian woman. Among a number of reasons that determined the everyday life of a Georgian woman and shaped her character, one should be pointed out, undoubtedly the most important: this reason is permanent wars , during which the men were beaten, and the surviving women, inevitably began to play a large role in the family and in public life. Indeed, if you glance at the history of Georgia, it is easy to see that almost throughout its entire length it is filled with endless wars and bloody invasions. From the IV century. , before our era, Georgia had to literally continuously wage wars or experience invasions from Arabs, Byzantines, Turks, Mongols, mountain tribes, etc. ad infinitum. Suffice it to point out that in 1795 Georgia was completely devastated by the Persians who turned Tiflis into a heap of ashes, and brought out tens of thousands of inhabitants. After this invasion Georgia was forced to turn to Russia for help, which took this opportunity to annex all of its territory. that during such a long period of devastation and invasions, a Georgian woman, being left without a man, emancipated, grew up and got stronger spiritually, acquired certain skills, certain character traits. It is not for nothing that the golden age of Georgia is considered to be the reign of the woman, Queen Tamara, who reigned in the XII century. along with a man, a Georgian woman, as we noted, does not feel the humiliation and dependence that a Turkic and even an Armenian woman feels. She does not wrap herself in a veil, does not hide her face; at home, at a party, at festive gatherings, she behaves with dignity. It should be especially emphasized one trait characteristic of a Georgian woman - innate politeness, friendliness, extraordinary, purely Georgian affection. While talking, she constantly calls her interlocutor or interlocutor with hard-to-translate affectionate names, the approximate meaning of which is "my dear", "my beloved." faithful, curious, full of sympathy For someone else's grief. In the event that a misfortune visits her own family and someone close to her dies, no matter how poor the family is, she considers it her duty to arrange a magnificent funeral and no less magnificent commemoration. During the funeral, Georgian women wail and loudly mourn the deceased. Until very recently, it was customary to invite special "mourners" who, for a special fee, took upon themselves the responsibility of lamenting and wailing. The Georgian woman likes to have fun, laugh, dance; and she is a great dancer. In summer, when a quiet, clear evening descends on the mountains and valleys, shrouds gardens and vineyards in a light haze, when bright stars shine in the warm sky, you can watch dancing and games in the Georgian village. Young people gather somewhere on the site, sometimes under the hay of an old round tower, stand in a circle and, to the sound of a big tambourine (daira), beat their hands in time (tashi); the dancer enters the circle, becomes beautiful, Rice. 1. The Georgian Military Road and the Maiden Tower near Mtskheta. A proud pose, and a free, lively, plastic dance begins; slender, dexterous, with arms outstretched, on which the wide sleeves of a Circassian fall, he resembles a beautiful bird of prey outlining its prey. After making several circles, he invites his partner with a slight nod of his head. Coming out of the crowd, throwing IN! sides of the hand, she stands in front of the gentleman and, often turning over with her legs, smoothly rushes in a circle. You cannot admire the light, plastic figure of a Georgian woman without admiration, when, with beautifully curved arms, full of inexpressible femininity, she smoothly rushes away from the dancer, and he, as if amusing himself admiring his strength and dexterity, whirls around her, overtakes and is about to grab the opened wings with hands. For those who have not seen this ancient beautiful dance of Georgia in such an environment, it is difficult to tell what a magical sight a crowd illuminated by the light of the moon is like, standing in the right circle and rhythmically clapping its hands to the cheerful sounds of daira, the dancers themselves, slender, light, beautiful and at ease fluttering in a circle. And all around is a fabulously beautiful night, warm, southern, silvery moonlight, illuminating the mountains of the mountains, the whole Georgian village in the gardens and vineyards. The life of a Georgian mountain woman was completely different: Khevsurki, Pshavka and Svanki.

Khevsurk
The Khevsurs, as already mentioned, live in the gorges of the Main Caucasian ridge. In view of the low accessibility of the region inhabited by the Khevsurs, it was previously difficult to establish an exact figure for the population; The 1926 census gives a figure of 3.564 people, which proves the fact of the gradual extinction of the population, since the travelers who visited Khevsureti in the 80s and 90s. determined their number at 6.000 people. The primitiveness of the social system and material culture of the Khevsurs has already been noted above. This circumstance naturally determines the specific position of the Khevsurian woman. Khevsurka also holds herself with dignity, in her gaze and movements one can feel self-confidence. Khevsurks are usually beautiful, slender, tall; among them there are often blondes and redheads with blue eyes. The names of the Khevsurian women are interesting: Mzia (sun), Mzekala, (sunny woman), Natula, Nanuka, Mamida, Dzila, Shukia. They dress in woolen, heavy dark-colored dresses, beautifully embroidered with colored threads and small buttons. On their heads, girls wear something like a low kokoshnik embroidered with beads, married women, in addition, a headdress (mandili). In the summer of 1927 I participated in the first expedition sent by the Scientific Association of Oriental Studies at the Central Executive Committee of the USSR to Khevsureti and headed by V.A. Kryazhin. During our stay in Khevsureti, we many times had to observe how the Khevsur women were free and at ease, entering into the conversation of men, joking and laughing merrily. However, when we sat down to eat, only men gathered around the table; the women remained at the hearth, where they prepared food. Serving any food or dishes, the women stopped three steps from the table and passed what was in their hands to the owner of the house, who set the item on the table. The Khevsur still has an interesting custom, (Testifying of extraordinary respect, (Who is used by a woman, and who is a re-reader of the ancient era of women's domination in social organization, the so-called "matriarchy." The protection of the honor of a woman lies with the whole society. Whoever has kidnapped a woman or a girl of his society is considered to have committed a crime against society and must be expelled from his native environment; even his cattle cannot graze together about the rural cattle. If such a guilty person wants to be reconciled with society, he must donate the cauldron and the silver bowl, slaughter the bull and brew beer. It should be noted that the abduction of women with the use of violence was practiced in relatively distant times. The kidnapping gradually lost its original character and in the subsequent her time the abduction was usually carried out with the consent of the abducted person. However, only the abduction of girls and, moreover, non-betrothed ones was allowed. For the kidnapping of a betrothed girl, a fine was imposed. The kidnapping of a married woman was a great crime and was usually punishable by death. Doctor N. A. Khudadov, in his monograph "Khev-Suretia", tells an interesting episode connected with the abduction of a girl, which he witnessed. The kidnapped girl was betrothed; the groom, having established who the abductor was, began to persecute the family members of the offender and declared that he would avenge the offense with death. Representatives of the Russian authorities intervened and summoned both sides for interrogation. NA Khudadov describes the moment when the parties appeared in a public place and the analysis of the case. The groom, a young handsome Khevsur, with energetic features, appeared in full armor: chain mail, helmet, armor, sword and shield. The abductors did not confess to the abduction, while the groom claimed that the girl had been abducted, and in the presence of the authorities calmly announced that he would kill the offender. In view of the fact that the girl in question was apparently 'intimidated and afraid to expose the kidnappers, it was decided, to the pleasure of the groom, to return her to her father, even if the kidnapped girl was an un-betrothed girl to the kidnapper, before marrying her. it was necessary to reconcile with her family, otherwise the abduction would lose its force and it was not allowed to marry the abducted. Later, along with the abduction, intermediaries appear: matchmakers and matchmakers who go to the bride's house, usually carrying an Abaz (20 kopecks . coin) or some thing of the same value as a sign of engagement. In addition, vodka and chintz are brought to the bride's house. After the betrothal, kinship is established and maintained between the homes of the betrothed. The betrothed, as we have seen, cannot be kidnapped or given in marriage to another ', since in this case the case may come to the murder of the offender or the fine of the guilty person in the amount of 16-30 cows. Along with Christians, marriage takes place either according to a pagan rite or according to a Christian. Marriage, as mentioned above, is preceded by matchmaking, which in other cases begins in the childhood of the bride and groom. The matchmaker who comes to the bride's house informs about the sender's proposal. If the girl's father agrees, the matchmaker immediately gives the nishani wedding sign. Some time later, the groom's father with vodka and chintz goes, accompanied by one of the cousins, to the bride's father to make a formal proposal. Then every year he brings vodka and a "pretzel of happiness" to the bride's house. When the groom grows up, his father again goes to the bride's house to come to an agreement on the wedding. Having obtained consent, he returns home and sends two villagers with two rams to the bride's house, one of whom is slaughtered at a revered shrine, and the other in the bride's house. The bride's mother bakes two huge pies, after which all the villagers gather at the girl's house; the bride is dressed up and escorted to the end of the village, where one of the pies is cut. The girl says goodbye to her family and fellow villagers and follows on to the groom's house, accompanied by only a few relatives, who are eating the second pie. The bride arriving at the groom's house is placed with other women on the lower floor, the men are on the upper floor, and the groom hides in another house. The wedding begins with the slaughter of a ram in honor of the saint. Then there is a drinking binge, during which the bridegroom's best man is required to drive the groom. When the latter appears, he is seated in a place of honor and given a glass of vodka. In general, the groom does not take part in the fun. The feast lasts three days, after which the bride's best man goes home, and the groom, along with other relatives, escorts the bride to her father's house. Here, too, they have fun for three days, after which the groom returns home, and weightlessness remains with his relatives for a year. During this time, the groom not only cannot visit his bride, but even visit the village where she lives. A year later, the bride goes to the groom, where the Yafets of the temple (deans) pins the groom's clothes to the bride's dress with a needle, after which the newlyweds are laid on the prepared bed. A common bed is allowed only during the first three days of the NIS, then the young are seen only secretly. This is how the betrothal and wedding usually takes place in Khevsureti. However, other methods of matchmaking have recently been observed. We were told that if a Khevsur touches a girl's shoulders with his hands, she, from that moment on, is considered his bride; if the bridegroom, who has wooed in this way, does not like the bride, she can pay off. In some cases, the Khevsur, bypassing the intermediaries - matchmakers, goes to the match; in this case, if the girl hands him the mandilas, the proposal is considered accepted. We had to meet a young Khevsur who was returning after such a successful match with the bride's headscarf (mandili) on his shoulders. He happily walked along the narrow path of the deaf Argun gorge, returning to his native selenium The husband and wife in the presence of strangers do not look at each other and do not speak among themselves. After the birth of their first child, the life of the spouses goes back to normal. During the first three to four years of married life, it is considered shameful to have children: in a rare family you can see more than three children. The small children of the Khevsurian family are explained by the fact that the Khevsurs are afraid of overpopulation. The lack of land suitable for plowing makes it impossible to develop agriculture and prevents the formation of large settlements. A country inhabited by Khevsurs can only feed a limited number of people, therefore, as soon as the population increases, the surplus should be moved somewhere to neighboring countries. Parents love children, but usually caress them furtively. Mothers in the presence of strangers are ashamed to be gentle with their children. Upbringing in a Khevsurian family is reduced to teaching a child everything that will eventually be needed in life. Accordingly, the girl is taught to take part in all household activities; she is taught to spin, weave, cook dung, which is used as fuel. Khevsurian girls are very chaste. To become pregnant before marriage is considered such a great disgrace that a rare girl is able to survive it. When she marries, a young woman brings her dress with her and “satavo,” that is, dowry, which usually consists of livestock. From childhood, a girl receives a sheep, a calf or a cow from her relatives, and this cattle with offspring constitutes her dowry. Property rights between spouses are strictly delineated. The husband has no right to dispose of his wife's property, just as the wife does not have the right to dispose of her husband's property. The husband cannot, by custom, give anything to his wife from his property or bequeath “anything in case of death. Spouses cannot inherit from each other. After the death of the mother, the sons receive the mother's dowry in equal shares, the dresses of the deceased remain for the daughters. Both husband and wife, in the event of the death of one of them, bury each other at their own expense, if after the deceased there is no property left or there is not enough for the funeral. Heveurka, as we said above, is under the patronage of society, as a result of this the husband is responsible to this society if he mistreats his wife. However, it should be noted that despite the above, the position of the Khevsurian woman is far from being enviable; Khevsur, valuing his freedom, puts most of the work on the shoulders of the woman. The Khevsurka, in addition to doing all the chores around the house, dressing and shoeing her family, reaps, mows and threshes bread on a par with a man. On the very first day of the wedding, the young woman must carry out manure with her own hands, bring firewood, hay, etc. "As for fun, pleasures, she is bypassed here too; during temple holidays the Khevsurka prays from afar, during the big holidays to her it is forbidden to take part in a general conversation; she can only drink beer and go home; she does not take part in food, in a feast. According to the concepts of the Khevsurs, it is indecent for a woman to dance, jump; in the same way, she is ashamed to ride; therefore, usually the Khevsur rides on horseback, on a horse, and a woman, laden with a load, follows him, grabbing the horse's tail. During menstruation or childbirth, the Khevsurka 'is considered unclean and should be in a small building located away from the village and called "samrevl. It is easy to imagine the web, how lonely and unhappy the woman feels sick, especially at night; they do not talk to her, they turn away from her. With the woman in labor, for two weeks from the day of birth, neither men nor women speak, and the dean oz (cleric) for a whole month. Even from her own female sister, a woman in labor cannot wait for help; they only bring food to her, which, without entering Sam-Revlo, is lowered through a hole made in the roof of the dwelling. The famous researcher Dr. Radde, who visited Khevsureti in 1876, describing this custom, says: “Let the readers imagine the position a woman in labor in the area, at an altitude of "7,000 ft. above sea level, when the mountains are covered with deep snow and frost at night often reaches 20 degrees. And at that time a woman has to lie" in a bundle of straw for long nights in complete solitude and without any help. "While the unfortunate, helpless woman, who has resolved herself without any help, while away her days in complete solitude, her husband is on guard on the roof" samrevlo "with a gun in his hand so that the devil does not kill the child. Khevsur husbands consider it quite sufficient to leave a loaded gun to protect the child and thus free themselves from the boring occupation of guarding "samrevlo". Before returning to the house, a woman should bathe, wash her dress and wash all the dishes that were with her. After two weeks after giving birth, the cattle are slaughtered and the house is sprinkled with her blood. Just before the mother's return home, cattle (sheep or calf) are slaughtered for the second time; the blood of the sacrificial animal is collected in a cup and the walls and pillars of the house are sprinkled with this blood; after that, the woman in labor can return home. In the village of Ardoti, in the very depths Bina Khevsure-tii, we had to see a corner saturated with Khevsurian life, against the background of which "samrevlo" made a particularly strong impression. Early in the morning we passed "samrevlo", where after giving birth there was a young Khevsur woman. "Samrevlo" is a small, low ^ building, without windows, made of flat slate slabs, the usual building material here. The woman was sitting at the entrance with a little girl, as it turned out, her sister, who brought her food. A few steps from the samrevlo, on the bushes, a dress of the “unclean” was hung, which was supposed to be ventilated and cleansed. A little further, towards the village, we saw almost the same building of a smaller size, in front of the entrance to which a young shepherd dog lay; the building turned out to be a dog kennel. The extraordinary similarity of these two similar buildings, built of the same material, involuntarily caught the eye. The Khevsurka is not spoiled by her husband's attention; as it was already said, among the Khevsurs it is not customary to show signs of attention and tenderness towards each other; if within three to four years after marriage, the Khevsur woman turns out to be childless, the husband can marry his second wife. It should be noted, however, that such cases are extremely rare. For the introduction of the second wife) into the house, the Khevsur must pay the relatives of the first wife a fine in the amount of five cows. If the wife is a bad worker, childless, sickly, the Khevsur can drive her away; in case the wife is driven out without sufficient reason, the husband must pay her "for marriage" and "for work." Children stay with their husband. The expelled wife can take, with the consent of her husband, only an infant. The father gives one cow, or four sheep, to feed the child. When the child grows up, he returns to his father and lives with him. The Khevsurka can also leave her husband. But in view of the fact that this is the greatest shame for a man, a Khevsur woman who left her husband is obliged to give him the word not to marry another. The one who breaks this vow is in danger of death. This is, in general terms, the position of the Khevsurian woman. The definition of one's position "wiped out between the devils" in the mouth of the Khevsur woman sounds deeply sad and hidden resentment.

Pshavka
We will not dwell on the description of the situation of the Khevsurian neighbor of the Pshav woman, in view of the fact that the life of the Pshavs has much in common with the life of the Khevsur neighbors; True, the comparative proximity of the cultural regions of Georgia and the easy accessibility of Pshavia itself make its cultural and everyday life in many respects different from that of Khevsureti. First of all, the unusually high literacy is striking: in Pshavia there are up to 80 literate people. Pshav's children, according to the testimony of teachers, are distinguished by brilliant abilities, it often happens that when they get to school, they already know how to read and write, since the elders teach the younger ones on the stones with coal. Unfortunately, the field is in the way! work, in view of this academic year lasts only five months. Bloody revenge, which is common in Khevsureti, is extremely rare in Pshavia, and a kind of fine is usually paid for shed blood. The natural differences in comparison with Khevsuretia are accordingly reflected in the position of the Pshav woman. Pshavka, like the Khevsurka, during menstruation or childbirth, is isolated in special rooms, here called "boseli", literally "barn"). During the first prenatal contractions, women in labor are taken to the "bosel", where they spend six weeks; on exit, they are cleansed by wetting the hair with cow urine. However, here these customs are largely relaxed. Keeping such customs, the Pshavs make deviations towards facilitating Their fulfillment: "Boseli" do not necessarily represent a dog kennel, often it is a pantry or an uninhabited room. Just like "the Khevsurka, the Pshavka is forbidden to approach sacred places, be it a pagan" hati "Or an Orthodox church. If a girl does not like the groom, she can refuse him. Pshavoks also have property rights. Pshavian women, especially girls, are unusually beautiful, some of them resemble Ukrainian women.

Svanka
Svans, as it was said, are related to Georgians. They represent the remnants of a once large people. For a very long time they lived separately and in isolation, as a result of which they were almost as primitive as the Khevsurs; they have retained their language, but the majority speaks Georgian as well. The total number has not been established exactly, it is approximately estimated at 22,000 souls. The Svans are a capable and freedom-loving people. A Svan woman is currently taking part in a family relationship on an equal basis with a man; and in public life. She speaks at the rally gakh as freely as a man. In the opposite; in contrast to the Khevsurke, the Svan woman of freedom- '; but dances and sings, moreover, during public festivities, in which both men and women take equal part, the leading role in dancing and singing belongs to the svanke. If at present in Svaneti there are outlined the sprouts of a new life, new relations, a new free and equal the position of women, then in a relatively recent time the position of the svank was much more difficult and dependent ... In view of the natural conditions, scarcity and poverty of life, the svank has to work hard and hard. All the hardships of economic life in Svaneti lie on a woman. She weaves linen and cloth ', sews linen, clothes, knits socks, threshes wheat, bakes bread, drives out cattle to pasture and drives back; in addition, she helps her husband to mow and remove hay, prepare firewood, harvest the field, thresh. In the past, she even fought alongside her husband. All property acquired by the spouses is common property, but the wife has the right to raise livestock and (to have movable property with her parents or relatives, and this property is her exclusive property. In case the husband beats wife, she returns to her parents' house and does not return to her husband until he apologizes to her and her parents.Unfortunately, it should be noted that until now, humiliating for a Svan woman, the custom of receiving payment for a girl who is given in marriage and In addition, there is still a custom of betraying girls at a very early age. This custom is explained by the lack of women. When the girl's father expresses his consent to the betrothal, the future son-in-law gives something to the bride as a sign of betrothal , after which he is treated. Then the groom invites the parents of nevsta to him, treats them in turn and gives them a bull. melts, the groom pays the bride's parents a kind of kalym with cattle and takes the bride to his house. The wedding ceremony begins by fastening the wedding dresses with a needle. On the head of the young people are put on crowns woven from grape vines, and prayers are read; then mo-dh is given communion with bread diluted in water. The abduction of girls and even women was relatively common in Svaneti not long ago. Ernstov in his Notes on Svaneti reports that at least a quarter of the inhabitants had girls and women abducted by their wives. The main reason for such a wild phenomenon is, as has been said, a significant excess of the male population. Meanwhile, the isolated situation of Svaneti makes it extremely difficult to find a wife outside of her native mountains. In view of the lack of women, a widow is allowed to marry her husband’s brother or next of kin, which under no circumstances is allowed among the Khevsurs. According to the Svanetian tradition, a married daughter gets married. new year from parents as a gift a horse, bull or sheep, depending on the wealth of the family. After her death, the right to receive such a gift is inherited by the husband or children of the deceased. The first childbirth of a married daughter must take place in the family home. No family celebration should be complete without the presence of a daughter. Just like among the Khevsurs, a Svan woman, during menstruation, is considered unclean and is isolated somewhere in an uninhabited shack, where she must spend seven days alone; at the time of childbirth, the Svan woman was settled in a special uninhabited room, where she awaited the onset of childbirth. When the birth took place, a spiritual person was called to consecrate the house. Before the baptism of the child, he was guarded at night, maintaining a constant fire, fearing that the devil would replace him with his offspring. The Svans are convinced that all sick children: idiots, dumb, ugly, are such substituted by the devil who were poorly guarded before baptism. It should be noted that goiter and cretinism (alpine disease) are extremely common in Svaneti. The child is baptized by lowering it into the font; instead of peace, they use soot from smoke or soot diluted in oil, with which the godfather lubricates the child, then the mother; sticks, which are used for lubrication, after the completion of this rite, are thrown into the fire.In some times there was a wild, though rare, custom of killing newborn girls. It should be noted that among all Georgian tribes, the birth of girls does not please their relatives. Georgians, appreciating the worker, usually joyfully welcome the birth of a boy. Vengeance in Svaneti is still very widespread. Both men and women adhere to the custom of blood feud in Svaneti. F. Makharadze in his essay "Svaneti" tells how during a rally, while he spoke about the complete senselessness of revenge and its destructive consequences for the Svanetian people, one woman beat another out of revenge. However, recently, cases of blood revenge has dropped significantly. The Svans themselves are beginning to realize the whole meaninglessness of this ancient custom and they themselves demand an energetic struggle on the part of the government. We will not dwell on the life of a Tushino woman, since this life has many similarities with the life of a Khevsurian woman. The Tushins, as indicated, are nomads, which is naturally reflected in the life of a Tushin woman. Summing up this chapter on the position of women in Georgia, before the Soviet regime, it should be added that the position of a Georgian woman is significantly different from that in the rest of the East. The Georgian woman, as we have seen, is a free woman everywhere, with the exception of some bearish corners, where else It didn’t manage to penetrate culture and shake the age-old foundations of archaic life.