2. The position of the Circassian woman before the October Revolution
The whole life of a Circassian woman before the revolution was surrounded by a number of shy customs, often completely barbaric in character. tight corset and do not take it off until marriage. This barbaric custom of restraining the body did the fact that the girl's breasts did not develop, and, most importantly, predisposed her to tuberculosis. According to Circassians, incomplete breasts are the first condition for a girl's beauty. The corset was worn on the girl under the shirt. It consisted of some kind of fabric with a lacing in the front and with two flexible wooden plates squeezing both breasts. Girls from noble families sewed a corset of red morocco or velvet and trimmed it with silver or gold braids. The Circassian woman was freed from this uncomfortable and harmful part of her dress only when she got married, when the young husband ripped open the cord in front of the corset and took it off forever. This habit was widespread mainly in the families of nobles and princes. In general, the costume of the Circassian woman is notable for its picturesqueness. A long white shirt with a slit on the chest and wide sleeves is worn over the bottom dress. The shirt is pulled together at the waist with a wide belt with a silver buckle d. A silk beshmet is worn over this shirt, usually of some bright color. On the legs are light chuvyachki, trimmed with braids; a round cap on the head, also decorated with braids and topped with white muslin with long ends falling behind the back. Hair that is loose over the shoulders curls from under the cap. Unlike women of other eastern nations, the Circassian woman did not wear a long veil; a girl could be in a male company, dance with young people and walk freely among guests, but always accompanied by one of her relatives. Everyone could visit; girl and see her. From an early age, all the dreams of a young girl were directed towards one goal - to marry a brave man. She reluctantly gives her hand to the person in whose past; several cases of bold forays that ended in the withdrawal of cattle and horses cannot be indicated. The ideal of the warrior-horseman has been preserved to this day in the girl's imagination. The girl in most cases had the opportunity to choose her own groom. Matchmaking began after the groom met the girl through friends and confidants. The young man could himself directly woo, visiting the girl's house for this purpose. Although in most cases the parents did not formally prevent their daughter from choosing a bridegroom, in fact they often preferred another, more noble and wealthy groom, who could pay more than a kalym, and helped him to kidnap his daughter. Such sale of girls was usually practiced by the Circassians before, but it has remained partially in our time. It is clear that such an order caused corresponding excesses, since the offended groom considered himself severely offended. The fact is that, according to the basic principles of highland customary law, the bridegroom was, as it were, the inalienable property of the groom. Such an insult to the groom belonged to the category of intolerable insults and, in order to restore his honor, the groom decided to take the most extreme measures.Despite all the consequences of the forced abduction of brides, nevertheless, this kind of abduction from the Circassians, especially from the poorest part of the population, was very frequent and marriage with abduction, preferred to ordinary marriage. This preference for kidnapping the bride, instead of marrying her through normal matchmaking, finds its explanation in the material insecurity of the population. Under normal matchmaking, the groom was obliged to pay the kalym as much as was required of him; in case of abduction, when the girl, after days spent in the abductor's house, became his legal wife, the kalym was appointed by the arbitration court, in proportion to the property status of the groom. The Circassians decided to kidnap also because by this act they were exempted from many costs associated with matchmaking. It should also be borne in mind that kidnapping a bride was considered a valiant business, one that deserves approval and imitation.It is worth noting that the custom of bride kidnapping in modern conditions is already acquiring a certain character of a criminal offense. It is difficult to get rid of the customs rooted in the minds of the people in several years. I would like to tell here the story of the abduction of a girl whom I had to observe in 1921 during my work in one of the villages of the region. A Circassian came to a young girl and, after spending some time with her, invited her to marry him. The Circassian custom allows jokes between young people who meet for the first time, when one side proposes to marry him, and the other responds with consent to this proposal. Thinking that the words of the Circassian belong precisely to this category of jokes, the young girl, laughing, answered with consent. After that, the Circassian left. "After some time, the same Circassian came to her again and offered her to become his wife. Seeing that the matter was taking a serious turn, the girl refused. Then the Circassian began to threaten to kidnap her by force, and indeed after a while, at night he broke into her house with Entering the room, there was a girl with her old mother, the Circassians invited her to go with them to the aul (the "offended" groom. The girl hid behind the old woman's back in fear and despair. The kidnappers pushed her away and dragged the girl out into the street. screams two old men — close relatives, girls — began to ask the kidnappers to leave her alone. For resisting the violent abduction, they were immediately killed. This was the brutal kidnapping. It must be said that the act of these "fellows" caused the most decisive anger of the entire Circassian population. This is a guarantee that such customs will be overcome and eliminated by the population. The Mahometan 'law allows polygamy, but the Circassians generally rarely benefit They have this right and this is understandable, because the poverty of the Circassian does not allow him to support several wives. It is characteristic that among the Circassians they have several wives, mainly mullahs and other clergy. Marriage among the Circassians is considered an agreement of mutual consent. The religious side of the wedding ceremony among the Circassians consists only in the fact that, after mutual consent to marriage, the spouses say a special prayer in the presence of the mullah. Then the mullah draws up a written marriage deed, where the obligations assumed by the husband in relation to his wife are precisely indicated. Here, the amount of kalym paid for the bride is also precisely indicated. The very marriage of the Circassians takes place outside the groom's house. Usually the groom brings his bride not directly to his house, but to the house of his closest friend; if it is assumed that the bride's parents do not agree to the marriage and can interfere with their intervention, then the act of marriage is performed here. If there is no such danger, then the marriage takes place in the groom's house after the bride is brought from the friend's house. In someone else's house, the newlywed sometimes stays for quite a long time until she gets acquainted with the new way of life, which she will have to {lead in marriage. According to the existing custom, the husband of the newlywed has no right to stay with; her all the time. From the young wife, he leaves to one of his friends and from there he visits her to accompany his friend, but not otherwise than after sunset. Before dawn, the newlyweds part and the husband goes back to his friend. The end of the temporary 'stay of the bride in a strange house is marked by celebrations that sometimes last for several days in a row. In general, marriage among the Circassians is considered a great event and they do not skimp on the organization of various celebrations. Usually they organize festivities with dancing, singing and other games, where all young people of both sexes from the surrounding villages are invited. After these celebrations, the young woman is already finally settling in her husband's house, and the very sending her there does not do without the corresponding rituals. The bride is accompanied by a noisy wedding train of horsemen singing, shooting and racing. During the entire wedding, the bride's head and face are covered with a scarf. The young spouse does not take any part in the general celebration. He seems to be on the sidelines. Folk etiquette makes him stay in solitude or go somewhere else to another village. He returns home not earlier than the end of the wedding celebration. If a Circassian girl before her marriage has a certain freedom of action, and a rather privileged position in the family of father and mother, then when she marries she turns into a slave in the true sense of the word. This is what the harsh norms of highland customary law strive for. How barbarous, for example, is the custom of the Circassians that the wife would never dare to call her Husband by his name either in the eyes or behind the eyes, just as the husband does not condescend to this in relation to her. The names "he" and "she" replace the proper names of husband and wife in the Circassian family life. It is considered reprehensible and even humiliating to caress children, or a wife, and generally talk about them in the presence of third parties. It goes without saying that all these customs are rooted in the traditions of the people that have developed over centuries. A married Circassian woman does not appear anywhere, no one sees her. In addition to her husband, she can only show herself to her father, sons, brothers, etc., and in general to all children who do not yet understand the difference between the sexes. According to the harsh customs of the Circassians, it is considered indecent for a husband to show himself with his wife outside the house. A wife can talk to her husband only at night, since Circassian etiquette does not allow her husband to appear in the female half of the house during the day. A woman cannot talk freely with a stranger, she should not, walking down the street, generally talk loudly, laugh and look at strangers. The wife does not even have the right to say goodbye to her dead husband; she is not allowed to be in the room where the deceased lies. She sits at home, looks after the household, weaves cloth and canvas as needed and dresses the children and her husband from head to toe. Circassian women are distinguished by their remarkable art In their works: the skill with which they sew Circassians and Caucasian chuyachyachki can be the envy of any master. The dress itself is more likely to wear out and tear than the seam made by their hand will burst. In all the works of the Circassian woman, a delicate taste is noticed. The ability to work well is considered by the Circassians, along with beauty, the first dignity; women According to established traditions, the husband is given complete domination over his wife, since his responsibility lies with the maintenance of his wife and children. The husband considers his wife to be his slave, an unrequited being who is not even allowed to complain about her husband. The slightest order of the husband must be unconditionally executed. Such a depressed state of a married Circassian woman occurs mainly because a kalym is paid for her. After all, she was bought, therefore, she is the complete property of her husband! The proverb “let the wife fear her husband” has found a classic application in the conditions of Circassian reality. Despite the rudeness and despotism of family relations, a woman in some cases enjoys the protection of a man. Circassians 1 are extremely sensitive to insult her. Among them there is a custom, according to which any revenge, punishment, and still less murder, cannot be carried out in the presence of a woman. Hua is postponed until another occasion. A woman with her hair down, rushing into the middle of the combatants, stops the murder. The persecuted, who has found the protection of the woman, remains harmless. If the woman is widowed, then one of the brothers of the deceased can marry her. This undoubtedly is an echo of a long gone era, when the ancient Circassians had a peculiar social system in which all men and women within one clan or tribal group were like brothers and sisters. The marriage was strictly exogamous, that is, did not allow taking a wife from his own tribe and she was acquired from another clan or tribal group.And since the wife was bought with the common funds of the whole group, then after the death of her husband she continued to make up the common property of his clan or tribe. This kind of abandonment of a woman in the family after the death of her husband is observed as a curious relic, albeit extremely rarely, and in a different form, among the Circassians and in our time. I would like to tell about this fact that I have observed in my life. In 1918, after the death of her husband, a young Circassian woman remained in his family and married her older brother, a consumptive old man of 70-75 years old. It goes without saying that the actual cohabitation between a young and full, strong woman and a sick old man could not be long, and in 1920 she demanded a divorce. The court of honorary old men of the aul, which examined this issue and was guided exclusively by the norms of Muslim religious law, decided the case in favor of the old man. It took a lot of strength, energy and conviction before; Soviet and cultural and educational organizations of the aul managed to protect the rights of a young woman and win her back from a sick old man. Divorces are allowed among the Circassians and are usually carried out by sending the wife to her relatives with a demand for the return of the kalym. It should be noted that the guilt of one of the spouses is necessarily put in the basis of the divorce, and if the husband cannot prove his wife's guilt and divorces simply at will or arbitrarily, then he loses the right to receive the kalym back. On the other hand, if the wife refused to live with her husband and left him without sufficient reason, then the kalym returned in full. Usually, divorce was practiced as punishment for the wife for disobeying her husband or for violating marital fidelity. In the old days there was another kind of punishment for adultery; namely, the Sharia court, which was particularly strict. He could in those days give his spouse the right to punishment up to the murder of his wife. This, of course, is not surprising, if we bear in mind that the cruel punishment for adultery exists among almost all peoples at a low stage of development. Such a punishment was quite consistent with the spirit of Muslim law, which the Circassians adhere to. The birth of a child is not an event of particular joy or importance for the Circassians. It is not accompanied by any ceremony. The name of the newborn is given completely arbitrarily by one of the closest neighbors or relatives, and the person who gave the name to the child must make him a shirt. The Circassians have a rather peculiar custom: after a year has passed since the birth of a child, objects such as a mirror, weapons, keys, scissors, etc. are laid out in front of him. Depending on what the child will accept from these objects, they judge what this child will look like when he grows up. So, for example, if he takes a mirror, he will be a dandy, keys - a clever thief, weapons - a warlike horseman, etc. Parents experience true pleasure when a child touches a weapon. The upbringing of children among Circassians is different depending on the class to which belongs to the child. Poor classes usually bring them up at home. A child up to 7-8 years old is with the mother and then goes to the father, who teaches him to work. The children of the privileged estates are brought up on the side in someone else's house and only after reaching the age of 16 they return to their parent's house. In this case, all parental rights are transferred to the educator and the parents do not see the child. If the child is a girl, then upon her marriage the kalym is paid to the educator. The return of the child from the educator to the parent's home is often marked by great celebrations. It remains to say a little about the legal capacity of the Circassian woman, which was provided to her in pre-revolutionary times. Women could be witnesses in both civil and criminal cases, but their testimony was accepted only when the testimony of several men was the same. The testimony of some women, as witnesses, was accepted exclusively in matters concerning the birth and physical disabilities of women. They could be attorneys for divorce affairs, they could be appointed guardians, if there were no worthy men available. In the old days, it was forbidden to commit blood revenge on a pregnant woman and subject her to corporal punishment until she was released from the burden. All of the above allows us to form a whole idea of ​​the pre-revolutionary situation of a Circassian woman from individual pieces of everyday life. Despite some of the privileges she enjoyed, her life was not easy. As a general rule *, a Circassian woman was belittled, submissive to the will of her husband, accustomed to looking at herself as a being of a lower order, to work, to give birth and to die resignedly. She was happy if her husband, by virtue of his natural qualities, was kind and condescending to her: upbringing, family traditions and material conditions of existence prepared her for a difficult life and did not give an opportunity to start the struggle for family, social and cultural emancipation. This opportunity appeared only with Soviet power.