3. The position of women in Dagestan before the revolution
Everyone knows the plight of women in the East. It is also unenviable in Dagestan. Almost from childhood, from early morning until late at night, day after day, the Dagestan woman is busy with hard physical labor. She carries on her back along the slopes of the mountains and along the paths of the gorges, bundles of firewood, brings heaps of hay or bread from the field, she also carries water from the spring. In addition, a woman's duties include cooking food, washing clothes, keeping the home environment clean. In a word, almost the entire economy rests on her shoulders. If, in addition to all that has been said, we take into account the unusually harsh natural conditions of Dagestan (- the lack of roads, except for mountain paths, steep ascents and descents - about a few miles, etc.), in which you have to work, it will become clear why a middle-aged Dagestan woman usually looks like an old woman. - At home, a hooded woman is in complete subordination to a man. This is reflected in all her movements in the presence of men. A well-bred woman, according to custom, should get up when a man appears. She has no right to sit in the presence of male guests. Due to the fact that the life of a mountain woman in the family is connected with these customs, she becomes an unequal member of society. It is interesting to trace how the life of the mountain woman proceeds from the moment of her birth to the end of her life. The birth of a girl is very coldly accepted by family members, while the birth of a boy is a great joy for them. This kind of wish is common: "May your son be born!" From the age of 7-8, the mountain girl-mother teaches the girl to physical labor, and from the age of 10 she is an irreplaceable assistant to her mother in the household. There is a strict distinction between female and male labor. For example, plowing, sowing, grazing livestock, and delivering firewood from the forest on donkeys are considered purely male labor. Household work, on the other hand, is considered women's work. To help a woman fetch water from a spring, clean it, etc., - the mountaineer considers it a shame for himself. In the European sense of the word, the highlanders are not involved in raising children. Children under 10-12 years of age are more in the care of a woman. Parents, with rare exceptions, do not give their children any education. “This is especially true in relation to girls.” If the highlanders did not let their boys into the Russian school, seeing in it a tool of Russification policy, they did not want to send their girls there. Even the city local intelligentsia ('actually the bureaucracy) was reluctant sent her girls to a Russian school. Only on rare occasions did a mountain woman receive a Muslim education, which consisted in the ability to read the Koran and, at best, in mastering the technique of reading and writing in general. Only in one respect did she always feel freer and happier than her neighbors from Azerbaijan, Persia and Turkey. She did not wear a "veil" (a veil that hides the entire figure of a woman with her face), did not cover her face. She did not know seclusion and similar forms of enslavement of a woman. Only girls are constrained in conversations, with strangers, unrelated men. As for married women, or widows, they enjoy relative freedom. Before the revolution in Dagestan, there were three classes: 1 ) the upper class — the khans, 2) the middle class — the bridle, that is, free highlanders and 3) the lower, or slave class (descendants of former prisoners of war, Georgians, Armenians, etc.). Almost every aul had a quarter where the slave class lived separately from the rest of the inhabitants. These class divisions are still given great importance in resolving the issue of marriage. So, for example, a young highlander from the lower class has little chance of marrying a daughter from the class above him. - "Far from you to my daughter, look for your equal," is the usual answer he receives from a girl's mother. sex begins from 15-16 years of age. Polygamy permitted by Shariah x) is rare. Monogamy is a typical marriage for Dagestan. Marriage 'among the Dagestanis is considered a pious deed. You cannot [remain celibate without good reason. Likewise, it is rare to find old maidens among mountain women. Dagestani for great happiness [considers having children: with a childless wife he feels unhappy. Although marriage among Muslims is not a sacred rite, like among Christians, nevertheless, only one that is concluded with the observance of certain formalities, which will be discussed below, is recognized as legal. Straight upward and downward marriages are not permitted. But marriages between cousins ​​and brothers are allowed. Marriages between members of the same clan are not always preferred to marriages between members of different clans. Cases of marriages between persons from different auls are very rare. On this occasion, even sayings have developed (like: “Better a slave woman from her aul than a foreign khansha,” or “A decent woman does not marry a foreigner, even if he is a khan.” The will of the bride's parents plays a decisive role in choosing a groom. so dA girl has no right to marry of her own choice without parental consent. However, the Sharia advises the father of his daughter (not to decide the issue of her marriage without first knowing her desires. As for the widow, she has the right to marry on her own. The custom of taking a woman away, although rarely, still takes place in Dagestan.) , between jerking off, and in the event that the girl's parents, once giving consent, then refuse, or give the floor to another. Then the highlander offended by the refusal decides to take revenge on them by kidnapping the bride. Abduction of wives (by mutual agreement) also occurs when the parents, despite the mutual love of the young couple, they prevent them from entering into marriage.When concluding a marriage contract, the groom gives the bride a kalym (not everywhere) .Kalym is the ransom paid by the groom for the bride ^ Kalym goes into the bride's property and returns to the groom's house in Kalym is taken away only if the wife herself left her husband. However, many Avars don’t give kalym at all. In our time, the payment made by the groom has only symbolic meaning and can easily be omitted altogether. Thus, marriage no longer bears now, especially after the revolution, the character of a real purchase. There are auls where the groom does not make any (payment in favor of the parents (the bride. In addition to the kalym, the groom also gives the bride "kebin-haqk" (u; Avars - "magari"). This type of payment is a timid security in case of divorce, or the case of the husband's death. Kebin-haqq, usually not given by the groom, but only entered into the marriage contract and collected from the husband upon divorce, and in case of his death, from the heirs. the wife released by her husband will not be left without means of livelihood. Its size is different depending on the financial situation of the husband, ranging from 50 to 100 rubles or more. whether she voluntarily marry such-and-such. Failure to comply with this formality regarding an adult bride invalidates the marriage. If the bride declares that she did not agree to the marriage and that she was forced by force, then she admits are free from the bonds of marriage. The marriage ceremony takes place in this way. From the groom's side, two witnesses go to the bride to find out if she agrees to marry him. The groom's delegates find the bride surrounded (by a crowd of women who enter into lively negotiations. After exchanging all sorts of jokes and witticisms, the conversation takes a serious turn. The witnesses ask the bride to authorize her father or elder brother (if the bride is an orphan), or guardian (if there is no older brother) to marry the groom.In the case of the bride's immediate consent, the women around her (begin to tease that the bride must have been impatiently waiting for this hour. Having received consent, the witnesses return to the mullah. the mullah invites the dsenikh to conclude a marriage contract. Delhi the groom is shy, then he does not personally appear there, but sends his father or older brother. the following words: “According to God's law, according to the rules of his prophet and according to the popular adat, with these two witnesses (invited from the outside), you - marry such and such (calls her) on her authority, with such and such (calls him), for such and such an amount of money (from 50 to 100 or more rubles). " To this the bride's authorized representative replies: "According to God's law, the rules of his prophet and according to the people's adat, with these two witnesses, I agree to give such and such, on her authority, to such and such, for such and such a sum of money." Each of them must repeat these words three times. After that, the mullah reads a short chapter from the Koran, and then everyone disperses. This whole procedure takes about half an hour. Now, after this ceremony, a delegation is sent to the bride in order to take her to the groom's house. Before the bride leaves the parental home, one of the groom's delegates proposes to give the bride a gift, as it should be according to adat. The bride's parents name some piece of arable land, or a cow, or some kind of fruit tree. Her relatives and relatives go with the bride, and they take with them a dowry, consisting of bedding, a dress, a mirror, a copper basin, large and small jugs for carrying water and a large chest with all kinds of sweets. In front of the groom's house, the eldest of the bride's retinue stops at the door and invites the groom's parents to name a gift they intend to present to the bride. Those are called. This is followed by a meal for the suite. A wedding in Dagestan is associated with large expenses for the groom, but they are fully paid off by the gifts brought by the guests. Usually the wedding lasts for three days. Wedding fun is accompanied by a game of national n instrument, "zurna", with a drum, or on an accordion with a tambourine. On the last day of the wedding, a copper basin is placed near the musicians, where the dancers throw money to the bride, whom they take turns to invite to dance. Finally, the married couple themselves perform, shooting rises, the fun reaches its climax. All the rituals given here are now gradually becoming obsolete. This is explained mainly by the fact that the material situation of the mountaineer has greatly deteriorated as a result of the imperialist and civil war, and therefore he cannot afford such a luxury as an expensive wedding or kalym. Accordingly, the size of the Kebin Hakka has also decreased significantly. Then, after the revolution, many highlanders became critical of these customs and did not comply with them. Nowadays, it is not uncommon for a marriage to be performed very simply, without observing traditional ceremonies. Previously, a highlander from a young age gradually saved up money in order to be able to arrange a traditional wedding. In the same way, the girl's parents gradually prepared a dowry for her, buying at every opportunity this or that thing necessary at home. The plight of the Dagestani woman, who is under the double oppression of need and archaic customs, is unusually vividly manifested during childbirth. The regime of a pregnant woman is not much different from the usual one. She continues her daily work in the field and at home. There are times when mountain women get rid of the burden during field work and return home with a child in their arms. Under "normal conditions" childbirth takes place in the presence of a healer grandmother. During childbirth, 'the woman squats. The grandmother uses all sorts of barbaric manipulations, such as shaking, squeezing the abdomen of the parturient woman, etc. In especially difficult childbirth, someone shoots a gun near the room where childbirth is taking place in order to scare the unfortunate woman and thereby speed up the process of childbirth. They also resort to this method: they ask someone in the mosque to shake the pulpit or take some earth from under it, mix it with water and give it to drink. They also turn to the mullah. He writes a prayer on paper, the written is washed off in water and given to the woman in labor to drink. In the mountains of Dagestan, obstetric care is almost completely absent. We have just said that ignorant sorceresses provide assistance to mountain women in labor, which often leads to death for the mother and child and, at best, to the maternal life-long maiming. Mountain women are extremely reluctant to seek the help of Russian midwives, which is a consequence of age-old prejudices. All these circumstances prompted the Dagestani government to open an obstetric technical school for mountain women in 1926 for 30 people. Divorce among the highlanders is very simple. It is enough (tell the husband three times that he lets his wife go, as the divorce is considered perfect, and the wife can return to her parents. A divorced woman can marry another only after a certain period of time (usually after 6 months D. If the divorced the spouses wish to get back together, then the ex-wife must first marry another, divorce him, and only then she is allowed to return to her first husband.Divorce is, as in all Muslim countries, a unilateral act: a woman uses the right to divorce only in exceptional cases ( These are: 1) the husband's inability to coexist in marriage; 2) the presence of a contagious disease; 3) the husband's inability to support his wife and 4) the impossibility of further life together. However, it would be a mistake to think that the mountain woman actually enjoys these rights. In fact, it depends only on the goodwill of the husband to give or not to give a divorce, due to which the listed cases are more theoretical than practical. There is still a great disparity in the age of the spouses. In this respect, mountain girls are completely dependent on their parents. There are often cases when a young girl, 16-17 years old, is married off to a 50-year-old man. As long as the life of the spouses continues, the husband has personal power over his wife, is her guardian, and the management of the household is entirely concentrated in his hands, and therefore the wife can dispose of their property only with the consent of the husband. But upon dissolution of the marriage, the wife has the right to demand the husband's return in full of the property brought by the ryu. In the event of the death of a childless wife, her property, after the allocation in favor of the husband of the share set by the region, goes entirely into the hands of her relatives. The composition of the bridegroom's property includes: 1) gifts made by the groom, both during matchmaking and before the bride enters his home, 2) a dowry made by her parents, which in turn breaks down into "masonry" and the dowry itself. The first is accumulated by the mother almost from the birth of her daughter; composition: it includes: clothes, jewelry, bedding and part of household utensils. The dowry itself usually consists of a section of remli allocated to the bride by the father in the amount of 1/12 to 4 / g of tithe, and of cattle, most often dairy; 3) the separate property of the wife is also embraced by the robe that is known as "magari", that is, payment, pronounced to her in the (marriage contract and acting in her favor in the event of the termination of marriage at the will of the husband; 4) the composition of the marriage property also includes gifts made to the bride on the occasion of her marriage; 5) any property that can be inherited by her; 6) everything that will be acquired by her by the labor of her hands, without the help of the capital belonging to her husband. As mentioned above, the husband is in charge of the wife's property, but he cannot alienate it otherwise than with her consent. For all the waste he made without the knowledge of his wife, he is responsible with his own property. The wife does not answer for the obligations entered into by the husband without her knowledge and approval. The wife has the right to represent her own property interests in court.