2. The position of women in Turkmenistan before Soviet power
The custom, which guided all aspects of Turkmen life, gives way to a new way of life only in the most sovietized places — the farther from the centers, the stronger its dominance; therefore, family life in general and the position of a Turkmen woman remain the same in many parts of the TSSR as they were before. Although the Turkmens are Muslims, the laws of "Sharia", Muslim legislation based on the Koran and covering the entire everyday and economic life of the followers of Mohammed, are applied only in some cases, and in all other respects adat prevails, a common law that puts a woman in an even worse position. than Sharia. Common law does not recognize the equality of men and women, and a woman feels this law from childhood to the end of her life. The entire everyday life in all its little things shows this inequality. Turkmen love children very much, but nevertheless the birth of a daughter takes place in a Turkmen family imperceptibly, while the birth of a boy is a joyful event in the family, which is celebrated with a noisy celebration. The newborn is in a hurry to give at least a temporary name, and it is necessary to have time to do this before sunset. The name is given by the father and not only in Arabic; it is often the time and circumstances of the child's birth are characterized, for example, "Gun Dogdy", ie "The day has come", "Ogul Terek" - "We need a son" , (this name is given if there were several girls in a row), "Anna Gul" - "Flower of Friday" (festive), "Kyzyl Gul" - "Red flower", etc. The child grows up under the guidance of his mother, plays together with his brothers, but already from the first glimpses of consciousness he begins to feel that the boys enjoy more rights and attention in the family than he does. Girls are plant-based — no attention is paid to their mental development and literacy training. At the same time, from childhood they begin to teach them to help their mother in her various jobs, preparing them for their future working life. From the age of nine, the lifestyle of a Turkmen girl changes. She is no longer considered a child, she is now — according to Turkmen concepts — becoming an adult, her marriageable age has come, and she can be given in marriage. She is removed from children's games with boys, and she is forced to spend all the time in women's society, more and more involved in housework or devoting time to making handicrafts, such as carpets, which will go to her as a dowry. In Turkmen, marriage is a commercial transaction between parents. or guardians of young people, without any participation or consent on their part. At its conclusion, a typical bargaining is conducted, as with any purchase and sale. The girl's father (guardians) is trying to bargain for the largest possible "kalym", that is, payment for the bride. Kalym comes at their disposal, and the infusion of significant funds into the house allows either to improve their economy or to live without difficulty for some time. Kalym has grown continuously over the past decades, reaching very significant sizes for Turkmenistan, several hundred rubles, and sometimes going over a thousand. The age of 13-24 is especially highly valued; girls younger and older than this age, as well as widows, are cheaper. The reason for the growth and large size of the kalym was primarily the inequality between the number of women and men: in Turkmenistan there are and were fewer women than men. The high kalym forced the majority of young Turkmens, who did not have large and wealthy relatives who could help them, spend a number of years in hard work in order to accumulate funds for the kalym, and often put them in bondage dependence on their future father-in-law. While the more prosperous Turkmen could buy several wives, some of the poorer had to remain celibate due to the above two reasons. To avoid paying kalym, young people sometimes resort to kidnapping a girl by prior agreement with her or not, and then the matter has to be settled through people respected in the aul, since otherwise everything may end in bloody revenge on the part of the kidnapped relatives. The age of marriage for a girl is usually 10-15 years, although sometimes marriages are concluded starting from 8 years. Such early marriages are caused by the desire of the father (guardians) to receive a kalym as soon as possible, to enable the son-in-law to pay the full amount before the onset of majority and to receive the right to use shares of public water and land. Usually a Turkmen woman marries prematurely, even before her body is fully ripe, and although early marriages, starting from the age of 8, are fictitious, denoting only a marriage engagement and a donation of a kalym deposit, a certain part of such marriages is actually carried out and leads to maiming of the female body. This partly explains such a wide spread of female diseases among the Turkmen women. Wedding customs are different among different tribes, but nevertheless they have a number of common features. After preliminary negotiations, several respected old men go to her parents for a bride, who pay part of the kalym in money and cattle and bring her to the groom's aul. In some areas of Turkmenistan, they arrange a humorous kidnapping of nevaTells: several dozen horsemen rush in and grab her, a fight of the parties takes place, then the pursuit of the kidnappers. The bride brought to the aul is placed in a specially prepared wagon, while the scenes of the struggle between the relatives accompanying the bride and the groom's supporters are again played out. According to Muslim views, marriage is not given religious significance, and it is considered only a legal act, therefore the marriage ceremony does not play a big role and can be performed not only by a mullah, but also by every literate Turkmen. On the evening of the wedding day, a feast is held in the father-in-law's wagon, to which all relatives and friends are invited, but the young are absent. Guests are treated to pilaf, tea, rich chureks (Turkmen bread), delicacies. The richer the groom's family, the more abundant and crowded the treat. Singers (bakhshi) are invited, however, dances and music are absent, and this gives a peculiar touch to the whole celebration. The next day there are races, wrestling, running, target shooting, etc. Winners receive prizes in the form of robes or pieces of paper fabric. In the next few days, treats and competitions continue. When a Turkmen woman gets married, her costume changes, and now it consists of a red silk or motley paper long shirt and pants, narrowly covering the leg above the ankle, then from a paper or silk striped short robe. On the head is a traditional high Turkmen headdress, the so-called sommok, which has special differences and is uniquely decorated in each locality and for each tribe: it is a high felt hood, wrapped in silk scarves and decorated with silver buckles, then several layers of silk kokoshniks, sometimes it is covered with silver badges, and sometimes he has a beaded garter that goes down under the chin. Unlike Uzbek women and Sart women, Turkmen women do not hide their faces, since life in the desert and constant care for the house and over carpets, as well as the weak influence of Islam did not allow this custom to be established. A light shawl is worn on top of the sommok, however, sometimes the sommok, especially among older women, is absent and is replaced by a shawl. Woolen socks and mules are worn on the feet. The chest of the shirt is hung with silver cups, plaques, and pendants. In addition, jewelry is worn on the forehead, in the form of a silver forehead, heavy silver bracelets on the hands, etc. Rich Turkmen women wear a valuable dressing gown embroidered with silk and various expensive collars, bibs, pendants and other silver jewelry. The costume remains unchanged all year round; a wadded robe is added in winter; Women do not wear fur coats. After the wedding, the wife stays with her husband for several days, not daring to leave the wagon, and then either is introduced into a new family, where she is immediately put to work, or returns to her father or guardians, where she lives until full payment for it kalym, and this can take several years. Before marriage, a Turkmen woman belongs, as alienable property, to her father or guardian, usually an older relative, who, at their own discretion, sell her and appropriate the payment received for her — kalym. Now, in marriage, she belongs to her husband, who sees her as bought at a price. It’s also good if a girl marries a young Turkmen, to whom she is the first wife; the situation is sometimes much worse, since there may be a difference of several decades between the spouses, or the husband may already have 2-3 wives, who, of course, will not meet their new rival amiably. Although in practice, as a general rule, monogamy existed and exists among the Turkmens, Islam allows its followers to have up to four legitimate wives and an unlimited number of concubines, but only wealthy people enjoyed this right. The rich put each wife in a special kibitka, and the less prosperous— all in one wagon, together with all the children. In a Turkmen family, all household work is usually divided in this way: the man is responsible for cultivating the land (for the sedentary and semi-sedentary population) and caring for the horses, which the Turkmen will not entrust to anyone; the herds are entrusted to hired shepherds, and the rest of the work falls on the women. Thus, a Turkmen woman has to manage her entire household (including: grinding grain into flour in primitive hand mills), looking after children, sheathe a family, spinning and weaving, breaking and disassembling a wagon when moving to another place. The time not occupied by these works is given to making various handicrafts, especially carpets. With very few exceptions, all Turkmen women are engaged in carpet weaving. Turkmen carpets are the best and most famous among the carpets made in Central Asia. For a long time they have been famous for the durability of fabrics and colors, softness and warmth of tones and the correctness of their designs, and often these are real art. [Figure 3. A Turkmen woman with her daughter.] Works of art. The most valuable carpets are produced in the Pendinsky region, where famous carpets from ancient times are woven. with drawings "Sa-lor-Gul" (Salor rose). Carpet production is a sensitive support in the family budget, and there is even a Turkmen proverb: "a woman who does not know how to weave a carpet should not eat." The more varied and artistic the carpets that a girl knows how to weave, the more she is valued as a bride, and the price for her grows, for example, from the number of types of "Salor rose" that she knows. Weaving carpets is very slow (for a season of 5-6 months only 2-2% of a square meter), painstaking and tedious work. The weaver herself prepares and dyes the wool. One has to work on primitive machines, sitting on the ground in an uncomfortable position. In general, this work is not very profitable, since on average it is possible to gain 40-20 rubles per square meter. A number of techniques and secrets of carpet making are usually passed from mother to daughter in secret. Despite her role in the household, a Turkmen woman, as a general rule, is not a full member of the family. True, she is consulted in every major family matter, she is trusted with domestic values, but men look at her as an inferior creature and unequal to themselves. The woman is bought and is therefore primarily considered property. It is true that the position of the Turkmen is better, and she enjoys greater freedom than her sisters in Central Asia — Uzbeks, Sartyans and Tajiks. Even if she plays a prominent role in the family, then she is not allowed to take part in the conversations of men or in the discussion of public issues. However, it is known that, as a rare exception, individual Turkmen women, thanks to their intelligence and personal qualities, nevertheless played an outstanding role in public life. The folk art of the Turkmen reflected in itself such an attitude towards a woman in the sayings: “the hair of women is long, the mind is short ”,“ a woman without a husband is like a horse without a bridle ”, and advice is given on how to handle her:“ if your wife is a fool, let your whip be fat. ”Ordinary law recognizes only some of the duties of a husband in relation to his wife, including maintaining a wife, and if there are several wives, then 'all are the same. The wife, however, has no property rights in the family, and everything is considered the property of the husband. At the same time, customary law places the wife at the complete disposal of her husband, who in certain cases may even kill her. According to customary law, a divorce is possible by mutual agreement of the spouses or at the request of the husband, for which it is enough to pronounce the formula “talak” three times in front of witnesses, while the wife can never dissolve the marriage if all the customary rules were observed during its conclusion. In the past, divorce was very rare. In case of divorce, leaving her husband, the wife is allowed to take only the most necessary things with her, such as: one shirt, one pants, one headdress and a scarf; that's all, regardless of the husband's wealth. Children remain with the father, except for the infants, but at the end of the period of feeding, they must also be returned to the father.On one suspicion of treason, customary law allows the husband to torture his wife, and for treason and kill her with impunity. A woman cannot return to her father, leave her husband, since she has become his property; her husband could demand the return of his property in court. The inequality of a woman with a man was reflected, for example, in the fact that when a woman was killed, only half of the ransom paid for the murder of a man was paid for the murder of a woman. And so, if a Turkmen woman is fresh, healthy and strong before marriage, then the transition to her husband's wagon little by little leaves a strong imprint on her from the hard and continuous work, illness and mistreatment of her husband, as a result of which she quickly begins to fade and age. If the husband is rich, then new wives come to replace her. At the same time, the entire age-old way of life could not but leave its mark on a Turkmen woman, contributing to the development of all character traits that are developed during humiliation and constant work, for example, how lazy are developed in men and aversion to work, so the woman is hardworking and persistent in work. At the same time, the delicate artistic taste that is found in the carpets, fabrics and other products she makes, puts her in this respect incomparably higher than men; their works are crude and devoid of any artistry. Among the negative qualities of a Turkmen woman, one should note sloppiness in their clothes and appearance and untidiness. All the coquetry in clothes is manifested only in the wearing of silver jewelry. In general, the Turkmen have highly developed prejudices and superstitions, especially fertile ground for their spread they find among women. All evil, all diseases are considered to come from evil spirits, therefore, for example, the sick are treated by reprimanding and casting out the evil spirit. An eyewitness reports how a woman, sick with hysteria and neurasthenia, was chained by her husband in a barn and chained to a stake in order to expel the evil spirit from her; for this they beat her every day with the chanting of prayers and almost completely finished off — she went mad. The spread of superstition and prejudice is understandable; if men's education was at a very low level