3. The woman of Uzbekistan before the revolution
One by one, PO 'two, with guys in their arms, with knots of silk cocoons on their heads, with faces covered with a thick net of horsehair, in gray veils, that is, robes, thrown over the head with sleeves long to the ground, move with a smooth, slightly hasty gait, strange, very rare figures in a crowded crowd, along an exhaustingly hot street. We rarely come across them because, according to the Uzbek custom, it is indecent for a woman to appear at the bazaar; she is there only when there is no one to replace her. The same custom deprives an Uzbek woman of the right to sell the result of her labors herself, even if they are many years old, such as carpets, but she, in such heat characteristic of Turkestan, wrapped from head to toe with different wings and robes, comes with her own - Finally, you can take off all the ridiculous bells and whistles and breathe freely, and not through the net! In what environment does an Uzbek woman live at home? Let us first consider her dwelling. It differs in many ways from ours. The whole environment in which a Muslim lives, the whole world; in which he revolves all his life, created according to the dictates of his religion. And the subordination of all important and minor aspects of life and their construction according to their numerous prescriptions is the fundamental rule of the religion of Muslims - Islam. Not so much the founder of Islam, Muhammad, the dreamy and gifted prasol, who became a religious and political figure in Arabia, as (numerous later teachers of Islam who on the basis of the urban culture created by the commercial capital, they tried to arrange the whole life of a Muslim according to their superstitions based either on the dark places of the holy book of Muslims - the Koran, then on ancient legends, or on their own inventions. For example, 'Mohammed in the Koran orders his assistants: also to believing women, so that they lower their gaze; keep themselves from passionate desires, show only those of their outfits that are out; put covers on their breasts ... "As you can see, with the last words the founder of the religion puts a veil on his chest Muslim women. About any other veils, neither here, nor in other places x Quran is not a word. So it would seem that there was no need to introduce them; and, in fact, among the Volga-Ural Tatars, who converted to Islam from their Bulgar ancestors a thousand years ago (in 1922 there was a thousandth anniversary), the general traditional domestic constraint of a woman is not complicated by hiding herself behind nets and bedspreads. But, unfortunately, since then the significance of the peculiar urban culture of Persia, with its jealous hiding of women, has grown in the Muslim world. Some respectable teachers, wishing to distinguish themselves in general by the respectable severity of the rules they uttered, among other things, put a net on the face of an unrequited woman, and on all her already multilayered clothes, a gray burqa, an absurd robe, thrown overhead, with p 'by the decrees. Of course, they, as well as their numerous followers, refer to the Koran, but, as we see, it is not at all thorough: in it, Mohammed praises women dressed only in "veiled", that is, without exposing bare arms, legs, neck and hair. Although the most developed part of the Uzbek clergy (mullahs), and now realizes the groundlessness of wrapping up in a net and a veil, however, very often defends this tradition, not wanting to succumb to the efforts of the atheist Bolsheviks. Only a very, very few of them do not object to the removal of nets and veils, or agree with this, seeing the power of the women's liberation movement. Similarly, the introduction of a woman's seclusion into the custom is based only on tradition. Once, the legend says, when Mohammed moved from one city to another, in the evening, when the caravan stopped in the wild desert, one of the four wives of the "prophet", his most beloved Aisha, departed from the caravan as needed and at the same time lost her necklace. she looked for him in the dark, but the caravan had taken off and had gone very far. The servants carrying a palanquin (portable canopy) in their arms did not notice that it was empty, as Aisha was remarkably light. What can you do? Aisha sat down on the desert sand, and she cried with fear all night. Fortunately for her, in the morning another caravan, heading in the same direction as Mogometov, came across Aisha and brought her home. And on this occasion, the prophet, as if he ordered once and for all the wives of the faithful to leave the house after sunset, and, as it were, ordered the husbands to restrain their wives at home. As for the Quran itself, it is limited only to praise addressed to the homebody. The barbaric, now obsolete custom of marrying girls from the age of nine, the custom so severely crippling these children physically and morally, is again based only on the legend according to which the beloved wife of Mohammed, the same Aisha, taken as a wife by the prophet, namely, at the age of nine. So, religion, or rather, a time-honored tradition, forbids an Uzbek woman to appear in front of strangers without a veil and advises that the latter, if possible, do not hear and even her voices. Such a resolution of the religious code, of course, could not but affect the general nature and location of the dwellings. In most cases, wherever this is in the slightest degree possible with the available funds of a given family, the yard is divided into two completely separate half-barns: outer, male and domestic, female, family - “ichkari.” We do not find such double-structured courtyards only among the poorest families, who do not have funds for the construction of buildings in almost double the number, or among those whose estates are so small that by their own dimensions do not allow them to be divided into two parts.In this case, satisfying the requirements of religion, the Uzbek arranged his buildings so that with the open gate leading to the street, a woman leaving the house to the outer courtyard would not be visible to people passing along the street, for which, very often, a wall higher than a person's height is displayed in front of the gate or gate, blocking most of the outer courtyard from prying eyes. From the one who entered the outer courtyard, the ichkari, that is, the women's courtyard, is completely hidden by a high fence. The female half is often also called "haram" (harem), that is, something forbidden, since one man's qi, excluding the closest wife's relatives, has the right to look into this corner hidden behind several walls, in which most of the life of an Uzbek woman passes. Moreover, the young wife, according to custom, does not leave it anywhere (with the exception of tidying up the outer courtyard) until the birth of her first child. With such an extraordinary secrecy of family life, there is, however, a curious exception when every stranger has the right to intervene in this life. It often happens that after the insult or beatings inflicted by her husband, the wife resorts to a somewhat salvific cry “wai-do-od!” - (guard!). Everyone who has heard this cry, according to Muslim custom, not only can, but must enter the courtyard and do everything possible to reconcile the spouses, which is considered a soul-saving business. Usually ”, husband; in order to prevent undesirable interference for him, he locked the exit to the courtyard and then already resorted to a whip or a whip. As often as such cases of attitude towards his wife were, there were still many exceptions, since everything essentially depended primarily on character husband, a man, of course, always dark, imbued with the view of a woman as a significant inferior creature in comparison with a man. A much more serious phenomenon for the Uzbek woman was her economic enslavement, consecrated by centuries-old custom, and complete propertylessness during divorce and inheritance. Although a peasant woman in Uzbekistan ("dekhkanka") works no less than men, doing all the household, gardening, part of the field work, and alone doing all the work on fabric, etc., selling the very products of her labor, as we have already indicated, considered indecent for her. The husband sells them and takes the money earned by the farmer. Also in the cities: carpets, skullcaps, and various sewing made by his wife were sold exclusively by the husband and the money went to him. makes her economically disenfranchised, but also takes a heavy toll on her health. In addition, having got married for 10-12 years, being still a child herself, she must manage the household, raise children, it is clear that health and strength will soon wear out, the dekhkan woman quickly begins to age. Often, at the age of 25, she looks almost old. In addition to early (especially in villages) marriage, the health of a farmer is also affected by the harmful conditions inherent in the life of an Uzbek woman. She has to spend most of her life, with the exception of summer time, in the female half, deprived of air and sun. The veil, covering her face, contributes to the weakening of vision and eye diseases, and the veil does not provide an opportunity to receive fresh air and sun. Her body does not know soap. Speaking of the unusually early, at 10-12 years old, marriage of a farmer, it should be noted that an Uzbek woman, a town dweller, three or four years ago, a little later; at the age of 13-14 she was married by her parents). Hence, there are so many patients with female diseases in Uzbekistan. Deaths during childbirth are not uncommon, due to the complete lack of basic knowledge in the field of obstetrics and gross violation of the most important hygiene rules. There were no midwives at all and women gave birth often being suspended according to an old custom on ropes or over a pit with ashes. It is interesting to note that many of these hardships were experienced in due time by a Russian woman. There was a time, three hundred years ago, when a Russian woman also lived in seclusion. She, just like an Uzbek woman now, was completely economically dependent on her husband, she was completely illiterate, completely dark, lived in the female half. Her parents: when they wanted, then they gave her in marriage, without asking the girl for whom she wants to go. Issuing No matter how deeply negative in all respects the living conditions of the Uzbek woman are in all respects, it must be admitted that it was they who, in the form of a reaction, developed in the character of the Uzbek woman a high degree of sociability with other, even if only before, unfamiliar women your city or village. Thanks to this sociability, women who are completely unfamiliar, seeing each other for the first time, in the shortest time, in some 11 / 2-2 hours, feel themselves familiar for a long time. With the manifestation, as is usually always the case of mutual sympathy, one such meeting is quite enough for them to call each other "ortak" - friend-comrade, or "apa" - sister. For an Uzbek woman, communication with other women used to be the only opening in life, the only entertainment. Of course, the constant desire for sociability shown by the Uzbek woman is a feature far from being unimportant on the path of her successful construction of a new life. Uzbekistan remembers in the history of the last 'century, isolated curious cases when three of the most powerful-spirited women, having managed to break the chains of centuries-old custom, advanced quite high in public life ... These cases are as follows: About 70 years ago, a woman died here, a certain Khal-Bibi, popularly known as Khal-mirab-bashi. Even before the Russian conquest, which followed in 1876, Hal-Bibi's husband was in the Namangan region (province ) the boss over the "mirabs", that is, head of the water section for irrigated areas. The position of the "mirab-bashi" of the provincial chief over the mirab is very important and responsible, since the well-being of the whole province and its individual cities and villages depends on the orders of the mirab-bashi, therefore, this position requires exceptional energy (resourcefulness and discretion. Even during her husband's life, she was well acquainted with the details of the local irrigation (irrigation) system, energetic, lively Hal-Bibi always took the most direct part in her husband's affairs.After the death of her husband, when she was already in her forties, she threw off her veil and chadra, dressed in a man's dress and forcing the Namangap people to recognize her as their mirab-bashi, took the place of her husband and sent all his duties until his death x). Her son, for whom she herself paved the way to the khan's palace, was later governor. The second case of the nomination of a woman, although less interesting, nevertheless deserves mention for its rarity in Uzbekistan. He was about a hundred years ago during the reign of Omar, Khan of Kokand. In the capital of the khanate, Ko-Kanda, now the uyezd city of the Fergana region, lived two poetesses, Uzbeks, who wrote: one under the pseudonym Zinnat, which means "Ukrasa (life)", and the other under the pseudonym of Makhzun, i.e. "Sad, sad." Both of them often visited the khan's palace, in the company of Uzbek poets, and one of them came to the court in a man's dress, with an open face and had the title of general. The works of both poetesses were included in the well-known collection of poems written by Omar Khan himself and his court poets, but this rare case of the promotion of an Uzbek woman in society is, of course, less interesting than the previous one, since it owes less than the first to the personal qualities of the advanced woman. After all, both Uzbek poetesses grew up and were brought up in relatively happy conditions for the female share of the life of the big urban bourgeoisie and the nobility, where only one could still find a woman who was generally well literate. The general state of literacy among women was absolutely deplorable. One more or less literate Uzbek woman accounted for many thousands of illiterate. The education of the Uzbeks (as well as the education of other peoples of Russia) interested the tsarist government as a means of an annoying policy, the ultimate goal of which was the complete conversion of "foreigners" into Russians, and one of the stages was the gradual displacement the native language of the Russian until it was completely forgotten. Of course, the school was one of the most effective tools for this. And the government officially charged the local educators with the task of Russifying the natives' students. It approached the implementation of this rather complex task in several stages. The government, having established its authority on the territory of present-day Uzbekistan in the sixties of the last century, understood that in the near future the Uzbek population, firm and fanatical in its faith, was still hotly experiencing the events of the struggle for independence, simply, will not let its children into Russian schools. Therefore, it was decided to start the business of school Russification in Turkestan with the neighbors of the Uzbeks, the Kyrgyz-Cossacks, as a people with much weaker cultural and religious foundations and, moreover, the Uzbeks previously subordinate to Russia. The organization of Russian schools for Kyrgyz children began with the establishment of in 1879 the Tashkent teachers' seminary, V. which the children of the Kyrgyz-Cossacks living in Uzbekistan were to study together with the Russians. This is how the first stage of Russification through the school was laid, which, however, did not bring great results. The second stage was an introduction to the course. After that, along with the increased admission of Kyrgyz-Cossacks to the seminary, Uzbeks from the ranks of the local prosperous merchants began to enter the seminary, taking into account the fact that the class of the Uzbek bourgeoisie entered the wide trading, banking and commodity-exchange operations, was aware of the need to give his children a good knowledge of Russian literacy and language, the local authorities in 1884 in the same Tashkent opened the "First Russian-native school for natives children." Two years after the opening of this school, when the successful enrollment of bourgeois sons into it was revealed., when, moreover, the upper circles of the Uzbek bourgeoisie began to draw closer to the Russian administration of the region, the Turkestan governor Rosen-bakh, encouraging local teachers to russify activities, officially expressed confidence that (the Russian language through Russian-native schools, "must become the native language of the native population of Turkestan." In addition, the governor expressed the hope that the desire for cultural independence, which was revealed in some Muslim schools, would be devoid of soil, since the Russian-native schools would lead to the merging of the old Muslim schools with them. Together with a call to action in this direction, our worthy fighter for the depersonalization of Russian subjects established, in his own words, "real and constant control over the direction of Muslim schools." Intervention in the life of Muslim schools was carried out under the plausible pretext of instructing them, communicating the necessary useful instructions and helping them in their needs. For this purpose, an inspectorate of Muslim schools in Turkestan was established, but after a few years, however, it was closed at the insistence of more far-sighted local teachers. In general, very few of the governor-general's "educational" dreams have come true. Only the Tashkent Russian-native school lived a more or less full life, teaching the children of the large Uzbek merchants, which are quite numerous here; nevertheless, other schools founded in the most important cities of Uzbekistan and even in the largest kishlaks barely eked out existence, due to the low attendance of their children by the local population.In order to induce the Uzbeks to send their boys to Russian - native schools, the Turkestan governor general ordered the military the governors of the region to take all possible measures to ensure that only those natives who knew Russian well were appointed to various administrative positions and services. The persistent Uzbek uprisings, broken by bayonets and guns, which followed between 1892 and 98 For some time, they put a limit on the annoying experiments. Later, the administrative regime, as well as official supervision of Muslim schools, resumed, and already in 1904 the situation did not differ significantly from the previous one. 1905 caused a strong shift in a number of Turkic peoples of Russia, in particular among the Kazan and Crimean Tatars. Ideas of a nationalist character prevailed, but in some places there was already talk of class struggle. So, in one tsz of the first issues of the organ of the Tatar progressive intelligentsia "Muslim", it is said that "we need to take care of the young generation and prepare it for the social struggle." Of course, only very rare loners could think this way among the almost exclusively bourgeois Tatar intelligentsia in terms of their class composition. In Uzbekistan, not only could there be nothing of the kind then, but the national intelligentsia was represented by only a few units for the entire three million Uzbek people. That is why in 1905, namely, the Tatars, opened several schools in Uzbekistan, which differed from the previous Muslim schools in that they began to study not only medieval theology, but also the same sciences as in Russian and European schools in general. year, the year of reaction, and until 1917, a small number of such schools increased extremely weakly. New in the national education of the region during this time was only the opening in its two main cities (Tashkent and Samarkand) of evening courses for natives. True, the number of Russian-native schools increased to 60 too much, the rank-and-file teachers, in general, were not at all distinguished by russification zeal, but these schools could not give any significant results due to their too small number for such a vast region and the number of students in them. It is clear that women from this miserable fund of public education did not get even a crumb. In Bukhara, the Khiva part of Uzbekistan, which had its own unusually backward government, dependent on Russia, until the proclamation of Soviet power there were only initial ones, old Muslim schools, which taught only one cramming of the Qur'an, incomprehensible, written in Arabic, and secondary schools, which taught the ancient theology and philosophy. And these schools were there too. exclusively! small, so that the population of one and a half million of this part of Uzbekistan, which includes more than half of the entire Uzbek people, were almost without exception illiterate. with the exception of the clan aristocracy, employees and wealthy merchants. Since the 60s of the last century, the Bukhara government has completely abandoned spending on public education. Educational institutions began to exist exclusively on the income of those capitals and estates (the so-called waqf lands), which were donated specifically for these purposes according to the wills of various philanthropists. what government ruled over the greater half of the Uzbek people who lived in, in the words of DI Logofet, who visited it in 1907, "a country of powerlessness forgotten by God and people." “Hardly anywhere in the whole world,” he says in his book “The Land of Lawlessness” —there is in its general mass a darker and downtrodden population, as we see in the Bukhara possessions. At the same time, he continues to say that the Russian government has not yet had a hand in public education in anything. ”The position of women in this part of Uzbekistan, hopelessly poor and dark, was, of course, even more humiliated. from expenditures on public education, as the already indicated reason!; the universal and complete darkness of the people, the poor was the second economic reason for it, generated by the same pre-revolutionary emir government. Its regional leaders and the entire administrative gang scattered around the area showed their official activity by illegally squeezing out a lot of taxes from both the poor and the average peasant, turning the latter into the first in two or three years. In addition to the four types of tax established by Muslim law (Sharia): 1) a tenth or sixth part from the harvest; 2) collection of oo> all livestock and goods bought and sold at the bazaar; 3) collection from any goods brought to the bazaar, 4) the poll tax collected from each Muslim head, in addition to all this, according to the rule established by the local administration, by extortions taxation was imposed on all bridges, and bridges, and river crossings, and orchards, and vegetable gardens, and every head of cattle, camel, horse, donkey and every pack brought by a peasant to the bazaar, and every weighing in the same bazaar and water required here to irrigate the field. It seems only the air alone was not imposed with duties here, but how barbarously the local authorities ravaged all these legal and superlawful types of extortions! Instead of the established tenth or sixth of the harvest, a quarter, third and even half were taken, since the collector determined the size of the peasant's harvest arbitrarily and categorically (undeniable). Moreover, since the donation from the harvest was collected not in grain, but in money and not at the market price of grain, but according to the established by the administration, in the end result, with this method, almost always half of the Dvina of the entire harvest passed into the hands of this administration itself. It was no better for the peasants-cattle breeders. One such farmer, who lived exclusively by sheep breeding and had half a hundred and a half (heads of rams, told Logofet how much he pays taxes for the herd: “From me, he says, they took 50 rams last year. That year I had 90 heads left, and the Gopyat took 50 heads from them. ”All these taxes, fees and fines (the latter were imposed for every, even the most insignificant (act), were collected with merciless severity. Such a system, enriching the administrative pack, led the whole country to complete impoverishment ', being at the same time the reason why the population, never guaranteed against the seizure of its property by the authorities, was completely indifferent to the state of its economy, almost not caring about its increase, knowing in advance that most it will go into the bottomless pockets of the administration. ”The submissive and for centuries downtrodden population of the vast Bukhara Khanate, which, as we have already said, was a large half of the Uzbek people, from year to year more and more destitute, resignedly carried all this terrible, unbearable craving, until the great and victorious revolutionary struggle of the Russian workers and peasants showed the peasants of Bukhara the path of liberation. And in 1920, together with the Red Army, they once and for all cleared their homeland, rich in productive forces, but deeply unhappy, of its age-old parasites.