II. Bashkir before Soviet power.
Having briefly outlined the situation and the nature of the everyday environment of the pre-revolutionary Bashkir woman, we move on to our immediate task, to describe a number of pictures of her everyday life. Their general background is inhospitable and reminds incessantly of the hard path of an enslaved toiler ... Bashkir is a child, Bashkir is a wife and a bash! pickaxe - mother, these are the three main stages of this path. The birth of a girl is not a joy in the family. The “grandmother” who has just born baby washes it and, having swaddled it, puts it in a cradle woven from birch bark, at the bottom of which a layer of powdered bark serves as a mattress for him, at the same time absorbing his secretions. In the shake, the child is laced up so that he cannot fall out, and in this form accompanies the mother everywhere, if the place of her daytime work is relatively remote from home. Usually, a mother breastfeeds her baby for a very long time, because, according to the Bashkirs, not having milk is a shame for the mother. At about the age of two, the child leaves the cradle and, having gained relative freedom, walks or crawls wherever he pleases. The mother can no longer give the girl her time, her hands are needed by the household. It's also good if, while working in the yard or in the house itself, she can call out to the child from time to time, and if he does not answer, go in search of him. But in the summer, on the pasture or in the field, she is deprived of this consolation, and the girl plays alone in the yard. Of course, in cases where there are more children in the family, the situation becomes easier, because the elders look after the younger ones. This, however, only applies to girls: a Bashkir boy should not look after children. From an early age, the girl begins to work, often performing work that is unbearable for her age and health. All household chores are on her shoulders. She helps the mother 'babysit the children, cook food, clean the house and the yard'. In the morning she gets up before everyone else, milks the mares and prepares food for sleeping. In addition, she must help her father in the field, in the forest and decisively in all his works; where there is some dirty and unpleasant work, there is immediately the application of its work. But all this remains invaluable: not only does she not deserve gratitude, but on the contrary - every family that feeds a girl believes that she feeds her for free and the only compensation is "kalym", the ransom for her parents when she marries. The work performed by a woman is essentially little noticeable to the male eye: it does not bring tangible benefits to the household. This is not a job of obtaining, but of serving, and therefore is considered a despicable and insignificant job. The girl is exploited by the men of her family, like a farm laborer, shamelessly and with the consciousness of her right to do so. Household, livestock and children — this is what completely fills the life of a Bashkir from the moment of her birth to her marriage. The whole way of her family life is based on unquestioning obedience to the eldest man in the family. He disposes of it at his own discretion. The time will come, and he will marry her to anyone and how he wants. Despite the apparent external freedom of the Bashkir woman in comparison with women of other Muslim nations, her position is both difficult and humiliating; a long series of offensive legal restrictions aimed at emphasizing her dependence and subservience turn her existence into a hopeless slavery. When she marries, she loses any connection with her family, she is no longer a member of the family that nurtured her, she is the property of her husband. In very few families, the girl is sent to study at the mekteb. "Mekteb" is a rural school where children of both sexes from 8-12 years old study. Very often there is no special school building in the village, and the “mekteb” is placed in peasant houses temporarily occupied for this purpose with the consent of the owner. The teacher is a mullah and education is purely religious in nature, limited to reading holy books and studying prayers. What do these prayers and books teach her? Yes, all the same humility, knowledge of "one's place", the same canine tolerance and devotion, obedience in the name of "Allah" and holy tradition, and again patience, because: "The reward is great ... And isn't it; not the joy of being a servant to your master? " With this sad baggage of "useful knowledge" she begins life. With a frightened dark consciousness, littered with scraps of religious texts, with a feeling of inevitable doom to some vague law, she makes the first conscious steps of her “path of the cross”. Here she is taught theory - she does practice at home. All together they create a “good Muslim woman”, a well-trained worker of her future husband. She pays for this "education" with hard work. But now the education is over; the ready bride is waiting for her fate, or rather, the decision of the eldest man in the family. He, in turn, is waiting for a profitable buyer. In general, marriage is allowed for a woman at a very early age; a girl of 14-15 years old is definitely a bride. She is married off against her own 'desire and will. The whole preliminary ceremony usually unfolds like this. A young Bashkir declares to his father about his desire to marry, very often without referring to a specific person - the bride. The father accepts this statement depending on the circumstances, but in most cases favorably. He chooses for his son a "diplomatic mediator," a "long matchmaker," whose duty is to negotiate with the bride's father. If the choice is not made by the groom himself, then the question of the bride is decided immediately. The matchmaker is the confidant of the groom and his family. They consult with him about choosing a bride, about the size and character of the "kalym". When all the questions have been clarified, the "long matchmaker" goes to the intended house, but does not at all reveal his goals. He greets the hosts and, sitting over a treat, conducts a conversation about the most ordinary things. In conversation, through various diplomatic tricks, he collects the information he needs about the age of the bride, the size of the dowry, etc. If this information does not correspond to the groom's plan, then the matchmaker leaves without revealing his cards. It is not uncommon for the owner to immediately guess about the intentions of the visitor and, having learned the name of the groom, puts the matchmaker out the door. This behavior is not considered reprehensible and is even common when the matchmaker is significantly poorer than her family. If successful, the matchmaker continues the conversation and reverently sets out the purpose of his visit. Having named) the name of his principal, he begins courting the father of the bride, convincing him to intermarry with the family of the groom and does not skimp on rave reviews about the wealth, generosity and personal qualities of the groom. After listening to the matchmaker, the owner asks him to temporarily retire and convene a family meeting with the participation of his closest relatives (without women). If the conference is inclined to a positive result, then the size of the kalym is immediately established and other wedding issues are settled. After the unanimous approval of the planned project by the council, the matchmaker is invited and the decision of the meeting is announced in his presence. As a rule, the owner gives him a shirt. Further, the parties are fiercely bargaining. Having reached a preliminary agreement, the matchmaker goes to his principal and reports to him the state of affairs. If the terms of the deal are satisfactory, the father of the groom goes to the father of the bride with a few relatives; moreover, he never stops at the house of the latter, but always somewhere in the neighborhood with his relatives. From here, he directs the second matchmaker to his future relatives, who, in contrast to the first, is called “short”. The “short matchmaker” is responsible for the final settlement of negotiations between the parties. When an agreement is reached, the bride's father invites all the guests to his place through a “short matchmaker”, and the groom's father goes to him with all his retinue, always on horseback. When all the guests are assembled, both matchmakers repeat again in front of everyone all the main points of the agreement. In rare cases, the transaction is notarized in the presence of the mullah. It is characteristic that until this time the young do not see each other and quite often the bride does not know who her groom is. Tradition requires pompous rigor in all wedding ceremonies, and especially from the moment the mullah appears on the stage, all relations between families are clothed in a solemn, official cold. The mulla appears, accompanied by a muezin, and performs taked (betrothal ceremony). First, he asks the groom's father if he will marry the daughter of such and such to his son, then the father of the bride, if he will give her to such and such. Having received an affirmative answer, the mullah makes an entry in the register, and the muezin reads sayings from the Koran. This is where the ceremony ends and the mullah, taking the fee, leaves. After that, the groom gets the right to visit the young woman in the father-in-law's house as a husband, but still cannot take her to him. During the ceremony, a tablecloth is spread on the table in front of the groom's father and a tray is placed on it, where he puts silver change, "for the happiness" of the bride. The father of the latter, in turn, promises to leave part of the kalym in her favor; all the guests also present them with various little things, most often some kind of clothes, after which, having appointed the day for the reception of the “kalym,” the representatives of the groom leave for home. After the expiration of the term, several relatives of the bride go to the groom. After staying 3-4 days, they go, accompanied by the owner, to inspect his livestock. Here they try to choose the best horses and cows for the "kalym"; the owner, of course, resists, offering bad ones. On this basis, there are often serious misunderstandings. This is no longer a tradition, but a purely commercial moment of the ceremony. Finally, the kalym was accepted, and the guests, having received new gifts, take it to the bride's father. After that, the wedding day is appointed. The number of invitees is set exactly and one of the matchmakers bypasses them, passing the invitations. On the day of the wedding, the groom is obliged to give the mother-in-law some valuable gift, called a "show". Usually it is a fur coat, which he brings along, among other things, "small kalym" (intended personally for the bride). Several young people ride on horseback to meet the traveling guests, each of them holding a small bundle of silver money. Having let the guests close enough, the horsemen turn and gallop back to the village, the guests must catch up with them and take away the silver. This ceremony is called - "cat - alypka-su" - salvation of happiness. Those who come are accommodated partly with the bride's father, partly with his relatives; usually several horses are slaughtered and the festival lasts three days. After some time, the groom must arrange a reciprocal reception at his home or, if it is not selected, at his father; only then can he take a wife altogether. However, very often he simply takes her away secretly with or without her consent. This is due to the fact that treating a large number of people is associated with a serious expense, and therefore it is sometimes postponed indefinitely, often up to a year. As for the abduction itself, then, presumably, at one time, with strict exogamy, this was strongly practiced in Bashkiria, since the clan, giving away the woman, appointed a huge "kalym", which forced the groom to resort to kidnapping. If now "taking away" serves only as a means for him to slightly limit wedding expenses, then even 100 years ago it was a valiant tradition that, if successful, relieved him of all payments. In the entire matchmaking and wedding program described above, the bride is the most passive, lack of initiative. Indifferent and submissive, she falls into her husband's house. All scores with her former family are over. She has nowhere to look for support from the moment of her placement in a new family. The only and sovereign master of her life is her husband. This is the second phase of her life. It is considered to be easier. How true this is is difficult to judge. There can hardly be a hard and fast rule here. We only know that, for some reason, without getting married, very often through the fault of the parents, the Bashkir woman finds herself in conditions much worse than life could have brought her from any husband. It happens, for example, like this: the girl's father at one time rejects one or several proposals for his own reasons: most often the reason for the refusal is the insufficient size of the offered kalym. He does not want to be cheap, hoping over time to sell the "product" more expensive. But years pass and the "product" deteriorates, the bride is out of marriageable age, the proposals are no longer repeated; father's commercial calculation did not come true. One fine day, the family, desperate to marry a twenty-year-old "old maid", abruptly changes their attitude towards her. Now they are no longer afraid to break her with any work. If earlier the expected "kalym" served to a certain extent as a restraining principle, forcing households to take care of her even elementary, now they have a full opportunity to compensate for the futility of these worries. She is the subject of bullying and insults for her brothers, for their wives and children; it is periodically exploited mercilessly, sometimes for two or three generations. She has absolutely no place to go, and she does not even think about leaving. Every girl knows and fears this, like a bad dream, “it’s hard to live in farm women; ".. Another Bashkir proverb says," Better an evil husband than a good father. "In a new family, a young woman is immediately shown" her place "; and here, like her father, she cannot sit at the table with everyone, she serves at dinner and eats herself after everyone; she has no right to participate in the general conversation; she is forbidden to laugh and speak loudly. The relationship of a husband to a young wife sometimes takes on the character of unrestrained arbitrariness already at the end of the first month of life together, although this does not at all imply an exceptionally cruel disposition in him. Simply, all everyday traditions, all social laws of the region are aimed at creating such a psychology in which the arbitrariness of men and the complete enslavement of women develop. In doing so, the young husband is right before public morality and before his conscience. It would never occur to anyone to condemn him: he is in "his own right." On the contrary, treating his wife too softly, he risks losing even her respect, dropping his manhood and causing ridicule; true, slu-; teas of an overly soft attitude almost never winds, so such a threat exists only in possibility. If behind all this there was not a centuries-old habit of slavery, it is unlikely that the human body could withstand this role. The cases of suicide known among Bashkir women are almost always explained by the introduction of personal moments, a number of complicating reasons, in addition to the usual situation: jealousy, the extremely difficult character of the husband, frequent beatings, etc. It is interesting that the corral, which gives the right to divorce , existed for a long time, but the very act of divorce and the attitude of the environment towards a divorced woman would rather lead her to suicide than to try to divorce. In those cases when a woman nevertheless sought a divorce, no one usually took her as a wife, and the question of returning her to her parents' family fell away by itself, as an unheard of and impossible thing. A divorced woman became a scum of society. She had no choice but to drag out the existence of a farm laborer, selling her labor to the kulak for bread. Such cases are not uncommon in Bashkir life, and the fact of hiring her with a fist, no matter how he treats her, is regarded as a blessing. Getting into such a situation, a woman truly "drank a bitter cup to the bottom." As the servant of a wealthy peasant, his wives and his entire family, she was the subject of constant bullying and oppression; there could be no question of human conversion, even less of protest. This was the price for the lives of those who could not or did not want to die, but now a young Bashkir woman becomes a mother. The name is the grandmother who "helps" the childbirth, that is, ties her tightly and begins to knead her stomach. They look at a woman almost as an instrument of production — her business is to bring a child, preferably a male, to her husband and owner, and therefore the custom, tyrannizing her as a man, protects her like a woman in labor. But as soon as the child grows up, she loses the right to him, especially if he is a boy. His first steps are not directed by his mother. In his free time, his father, playing with him, inspires jokes. he has contempt for the woman — for the mother, so if the baby hits her or simply shows disdain, he laughs, kind and proud of his son. Soon the boy passes into the hands of the mullah. Despite this situation, all the care for him, at least until the age of 8, lies with the mother; until the age of five she follows him, like any mother, then she begins to serve him. She is hopelessly attached to the child; if he gets sick, or dies, she must answer to her husband and can answer cruelly. It's another matter if the child is a girl. In this case, the mother is given complete freedom of action, as long as it is not to the detriment of her time, and, therefore, work. (As a rule, a woman has to work all day, from morning to evening). During the day, she certainly has no time, but the night is at her disposal. She bathes the child, talks to him and humbly prepares him for her slave lot. There are, of course, deviations for the better or for the worse. If the husband is young, too poor and the wife he has taken from him is the first — her life is much easier. But if he is an elderly man and has several wives, the young wife should look after them and please them with work and submission. Deviations for the better are in direct proportion to the material condition of the husband; Thus, a rich Bashkir has the opportunity to support an employee, sometimes even several, which, of course, partly relieves his wife from black work, allows her to use the time at her own discretion (unfortunately, such an improvement has harmful roots in class exploitation and in the well-being of the economically stronger element at the expense of the weakest). Yet in some respects, a Bashkir woman feels freer after marriage; she is allowed to walk everywhere with an open face (only from the father-in-law is supposed to always close); she can talk to a man and even walk down the street with him. Only crossing the road and overtaking at a meeting is impossible."If a woman even bears a weight and she needs to cross the road along which a man is walking, no matter how far he goes, she must let him go ahead." Otherwise, her life is not much different from the previous one and, in the end, largely depends on the nature and natural properties of her husband. As before, everything around her is aimed at once again reminding her of her insignificance. As before, when her husband has guests, she serves them, and after seeing off the guests, she retires to her “female world”, the world of livestock and children's crying. She is not allowed into the mosque, as it is considered unclean, nor even in the cemetery, which is venerated on a par with the mosque. There is no need to even talk about any participation in public life — at gatherings, meetings. The general oppression of the Bashkir woman was further strengthened by a number of economic and legal restrictions, laws on inheritance and land allotments, according to which she not only did not enjoy equal rights with a man, but most often was not taken into account at all as a legally capable family member. Only one day a year belongs to her. In the beginning of spring, a "cargo-tui", a specially women's holiday, is held annually. In addition to women, a boy "7TSG" TZ years; there are no men And and there is no oppression and usual oppression. All the women leave the village in the morning, taking some food with them, and stay in the field for the whole day. At first, everyone is frightened by the unusual freedom and workers do not know what to do with themselves. Revival does not come immediately to this | the only day of the spring amnesty; at first, only boys frolic, and girls and women look at them lying on the grass. Then they rise one by one, joining the children. A game of burners begins, a race for distillation. Many people tuck their shirts into their pants to make running easier. The old women cook their food in large cauldrons specially brought for this purpose. All faces are open and, perhaps, for the only time a year, they are truly joyful. (So ​​until the evening. With the sunset the procession of the carriage - \\ revolves into the village. The mosque rises on the edge of the azanchis calling the believers from the minaret. The women walk quieter. Men come across and joke with them. They lower their eyes, excitement Let us note some more features of the position of the Bashkir woman in the family, and above all, polygamy, which is somewhat widespread in Bashkiria, although in most cases it is the privilege of the kulak group of the population. It is not uncommon for the younger wife to be younger than the children of other wives. degree, survivals of the old custom, according to which, after the death of her husband, a widow marries his younger brother or nephew. The reasons for this custom are purely economic (the ability not to pay the kalym, as well as some difficulty in the family system and strict exogamy of getting a wife on the side) At present, together with the generic structure, it has lost its coercive character. In poor families, it is more common, in rich less often. th culture and serfdom view of women did their job. It is difficult to imagine a more complete hopelessness than that of the pre-revolutionary Bashkir woman. It was unthinkable even for individual strong individualities of the female environment to get out of bondage. Now, this colonial psychology, which has long become a terrible past for us, is collapsing and the former "foreigners of great Russia" have become full-fledged peoples of the Autonomous Republics. And only now the Bashkir woman, in the ranks of her compatriots, is slowly entering the great path of emancipation.