4. Women of Soviet Tatarstan
After the October Revolution, the working women of Tatarstan are more and more involved in the cause of the proletarian revolution and for the most part take the side of the Soviet regime. In a difficult era, when Tatarstan was flooded with White Guard detachments, which eradicated all traces of Sovietization with fire and sword, they met a certain hostility in the Tatar working masses. During the civil war, many Tatar workers actively fought in the revolutionary ranks against the whites. In 1919, Kazan organized the first holiday of the workers' day on March 8, in which many Tatar women participated. Even before the decree on the establishment of the Autonomous Republic of Tatarstan, the Muslim bureau of the Kazan Gubkom of the All-Union Communist Party of Bolsheviks was organizing a special section for work among working Tatars. After the formation of the Tatrespublika, the task of political education of Tatar women and drawing them into the ranks of the party is more and more improved and progressing. At the end of 1926, according to the party census, the regional party organization of the Tatrespublika had 10,282 members in its ranks, of which 1,273 were women, that is, 12.4 ° / o; since 1922, the number of women communists has quadrupled. In turn, along ethnic lines, they are divided as follows: Russians - 829, that is, 65.1 ° / 0; Tatars — 366, that is, 28% and other nationalities — 78, that is, 6.9%. Russian women who are part of the party are mostly workers and office workers, and Tatar women are mostly peasant women. However, it should be noted that the process of increasing the percentage of Tartars among the urban population during the years of Soviet power has increased enormously. The years that followed the imperialist and civil war, which, in addition to the general ruin of the peasant economy, brought with them an unprecedented poor harvest, moved even larger cadres of the rural population to work in the city. A large percentage of them were women who had lost their breadwinner. Then, as the Sovietization of Tatarstan deepened, we see a gradual decomposition of the old family life, especially among the urban Tatar population: workers, artisans and the petty bourgeoisie. Workers' wives and housewives have long ceased to play that pitiful, humiliated role of a wordless slave, which was previously predetermined from birth to every Tatar woman. They strive for personal life, for independent earnings. In the industry of Soviet Tatarstan at the beginning of 1924, there were 3.873 women employed in production, in the next 1925 this number decreased due to the liquidation of the garment industry to 2.837, but already in 1926 it rose again to 3.375, making 2O, 29 ° / about all industrial workers of the republic. The influx of women into production is great, so much so that the size of the local industry can no longer satisfy it; hence the increasing unemployment. In 1927, 7,964 unemployed women were registered, of which 802 were Tatar women. Tatar women workers are mainly concentrated in production, while Russian women, in addition, make up a rather significant percentage of Soviet employees. The total number of women trade union members in 1926 was 26,858, that is, 26.08о / о of all members of trade unions, of which 3.551 were Tatar women. This process of drawing women into the city, into production and into the trade union results in a radical transformation of the historically formed type of Tatar woman, changing its entire psychology, created by the old way of life. Until recently, a woman who is dark and barely literate is now beginning to strive for education. In the universities opened by the Soviet government of Tatarstan, workers' schools, technical schools, courses, schools of FZU and vocational schools, the number of Tatar women is already very significant. In Soviet educational institutions, the Tatar worker learns to read and write both in Russian and in her own language, which is no longer persecuted, but on the contrary enjoys official recognition. The matter of political education of Tatar workers is also going well. In addition to a number of general newspapers and magazines in Tatar and Russian, the women's department of the Tatobkom of the CPSU (b; together with the department of workers and peasants of the Central Committee of the CPSU (b; publishes a special women's magazine Azad Katyn ( Svobodnaya Rabotnitsa.) The growth of the political consciousness of the Tatar female masses is especially striking if we take one, the most indicative area of ​​the republic's social life - the participation of women in the soviets. In the first years, the involvement of Tatar women in political life was rather slow. For the most part, Tatar peasant women were not at all used the electoral rights granted to them by the revolution. This was explained by a strong tradition at that time: husbands, fathers, brothers looked at it disapprovingly, and sometimes resorted to active influence, using the last remnants of their once formidable influence. the city among the much more conscious Tatar workers, oddly enough, there was such shameful and ignorant attitude towards a woman, her personality, her rights. Even in the election campaign of 1924/25. h women participated in council elections in the amount of 12.7% of the total number of all voters while men came to the polls 63.3%. Until that year, women in some localities did not appear at all for elections. The party began an energetic struggle against this phenomenon. Instead of the previous formal approach to elections, when individual female candidates were mechanically included in the lists, a large campaign was launched, during which the working people of the city and village were explained all the absurdity and reactionaryness of this contempt for women, inherited from the previous exploitative system. In addition, a new electoral method was used for the first time in the 1925/26 election campaign. Election meetings were organized for women separately from men; in this way, great activity and ease of the electorate, freed from male influence, was achieved. The results of this event showed up very quickly. The number of women voters in this campaign increased to 35.4% of the total number of voters. In the same year, 3,282 women were elected to village councils throughout the republic, of which 57%, i.e. 1,818 people were Tatar, whereas in the previous 1924/25 the number of women in village councils was only 1,016 (of whom 538 were Tatars), and in 1923/24 only 324 (of whom 117 were Tatars; As a result of the 1925/26 election campaign, 9 women (7.7 ° / 0) were elected to Tattsik, of whom 5 were Tartars. In this campaign, women representatives were actively involved in all election commissions; finally, after the elections, It is necessary to especially note the remarkable fact that in these elections it was Tatar women who showed the greatest activity, outstripping both Russians and national women.For example, Russian peasant women often did not attend election meetings or left before the elections, citing the fact that they were in a hurry there were almost no such cases among Tatar women.In some areas, for example, in the Laishevsky canton, the activity of women's electoral gatherings significantly exceeded the activity of men's. there are cases when men tried to put pressure on women-voters and impose certain candidates on them, but women's assemblies came out of this test with honor, firmly defending an independent line. When discussing any one candidate, 9-10 women-speakers came forward, and in their speeches they were mostly sincere, objective and persistent. Sometimes men continued to hinder the work of women's meetings, not recognizing the legitimacy of their chosen candidates and demanding their re-election through a men's meeting, but such attempts still ended in failure thanks to the resilience of the women. The role of women in Soviet Tatarstan in the field of justice is also very noticeable. In addition to the numerous women elected as people's judges in the TSSR, there are women judges, investigators, notaries and one woman prosecutor. Participation of women in cooperation is quite important for the emancipation of a Tatar woman. And in the Kazan Central Regional Committee and in rural cooperatives, the number of working Tatar women is increasing every year. Here the Tatar peasant woman joins social life, gets imbued with the collective consciousness and contributes to the cause of socialist construction.All these facts are extremely important and interesting, as a living illustration of the tremendous successes achieved by the government and the party in the field of restructuring of everyday life. 2. Pioneers and Octobrists! in the Tatar school. A lot has been done in the field of eliminating those terrible antihygienic conditions, from which in the past such a mass of Tatar women and children died, especially in the villages, in the field of protection of motherhood and infancy. Currently, Kazan has 1G crèches, 6 children's consultations, 6 consultations for pregnant women, maternity and infant care home, 21 kindergartens, 6 playgrounds and 3 child homes; in the cantons, there are up to 120 nurseries, 22 consultations, a maternity and infant care home, 22 kindergartens, '54 playgrounds and 8 orphanages. Of course, with all this work done, there are some shortcomings; so, for example, there is an acute shortage of workers who speak the Tatar language, which is so necessary for medical posts, judicial institutions, etc. in the village; there are still some shortcomings, but in general, the results of the work done in these recent years are very significant. Before our eyes, a Tatar woman, who was so recently a slave, a livestock, a thing, now comes to life - becomes independent, enters the arena of public and political activity. The centuries-old way of stupid religious suppression, the tyranny of the husband, the tyranny of the mullahs, is gradually becoming obsolete and will soon be forgotten by the Tatar as a bad dream. Ladies and young ladies from Tatar bourgeois families sought reforms within the limits outlined by the Sharia, but the female masses of Tatarstan rejected this program along with the former patriarchal way of life and the rule of religious prejudices. Modern female youth is already free from the power of the difficult past and the tradition it has created; percentage of girls the Komsomol is growing, and the cadres of young pioneers are expanding. The Tatar Komsomol organization seeks to involve in its work an ever wider cadre of working youth, in particular Tatar; in 1927 the Tatars made up 42.1 o / o in the Komsomol against 39.8 o / o in the previous year. The Komsomol organization conducts vigorous cult work, fights against the remnants of the old Muslim way of life, mainly in relation to women, develops physical education among the working youth, etc. The Pioneer organization of the TSSR, numbering about 15,000 people. still somewhat weak; the lack of teaching staff is very disadvantageous in her work. Nevertheless, the drawing of Tatar children into the ranks of the pioneers is proceeding at a rather rapid pace. The Tatar girl, who is growing up and studying in the Soviet school, will finally put an end to those remnants of the recent shameful slavery, which are still preserved here and there in the bear corners of Tatarstan.