3. Soviet power in Oiratia With the beginning of the October Revolution, as soon as the principles of national emancipation of the oppressed peoples of the Union proclaimed by the Soviet power had sunk to the brink, a national movement began in it. But under the unfavorable conditions in which the region was located due to the distance and the complete absence of railway lines connecting Oiratia with the center, it was very difficult to start consistently carrying out national emancipation, especially since the civil war that broke out with the beginning of the revolution completely cut off the region from center. Nevertheless, the very first steps of the Soviet regime caused an extraordinary sublimation of national consciousness, and a national movement began throughout the region, expressed in the organization of Oirat schools and clubs. The wave of the Kolchak counterrevolutionary movement that swept through Altai completely swept away these first national aspirations; the best Oirat representatives were killed or imprisoned, and over the unfortunate land the whip so well known to him and a formidable commanding shout whistled again. The only difference was that in view of the "Bolshevik" sympathies of the population, the measures took on an openly punitive and massive character. Colonel Khmelevsky, appointed by Kolchak as the commander-in-chief of all troops in Altai, set out to destroy all traces of the revolution here. A nightmare wave of massacres, violence and torture spread throughout the entire region. By orders of Khmelevsky, the leaders of the White-bandit detachments (Kaigorov, Lebedev, Zaitsev, Shustov, etc.) exterminated entire villages, then putting them on fire. The "infection of Bolshevism", however, stayed in the region, feeding the partisan movement that broke out in the rear at Kolchak. As a result of the civil war, the region was subjected to terrible economic ruin, for the Kolchak intendants drove away cattle in large numbers. We are not talking about the robberies, which took on a mass character. The misfortunes that befell the region ended only with the occupation of Siberia by the Red Army, in early 1920. However, when organizing and reorganizing administrative and public administration on the basis of Sovietization of the region, at first, the psychology of the "conquerors", which (the policy of tsarist Russia nurtured among a significant part of the Russian population. The point is that since the role of political leaders of the soviets It turned out, for the most part, local Russian peasant circles, who had not yet outlived the remnants of "conquering" psychology, the line they were pursuing turned out to be harmful to the interests of the Oirat population, without whose active participation in economic construction there could be no question of restoring and developing the economic power of the region. a number of measures to straighten the political line and adapt the apparatus of Soviet power to the specific conditions of the Oirat life and the Oirat economy. ra. Only this date can, therefore, be considered the beginning of that long process which marks the true struggle for national emancipation proclaimed by the October Revolution. Let us emphasize once again: a certain delay in the implementation of the main tasks of reorganizing Oirat life on an October basis is explained by three series of reasons described by us above. These are, first of all, the geographical conditions that move the region away from the center and make it difficult to communicate with the region and inside it (the complete absence of railways and the sad state of other roads is explained by the mountainous nature of the country). Secondly, these are the historical conditions associated with the colonialist policy of tsarist Russia and the remnants of the psychology of "conquerors" among Russian settlers. And finally, thirdly, it is a civil war. In addition, it should be noted that there was no industry in the province, and in this regard, no workers' asset, which was the most revolutionary factor in other areas of the Union. What did this new Soviet power do for the Oirats? First of all, it provided economic positions for the Oirat economy. The redistribution of land use and land management on the basis of the nationalization of land, in many cases [by returning the land plots seized from them, to the Oirat, simultaneously protected them from predatory pushing into the most remote and inconvenient territories. The process of this crowding out can be considered basically liquidated. Secondly — and this [no less important — the Soviet government radically suppressed the system of predatory commodity circulation, which pumped a significant share of the products of the pirate labor economy into the clutches of the commercial and kulak strata of the population, both native and, predominantly, Russian. In any case, the relentless struggle against all kinds of cabal deals, and mainly the developing cooperation and state trade, have already paralyzed the most difficult manifestations of this system for the ordinary Oirat, and outlined a very real turning point in the organization of normal commodity exchange. Already at the moment, one can state an undoubted improvement in the economic situation of the bulk of the Oirat population. In the field of social and political achievements (no less significant. Firstly, national autonomy, opening up the broadest opportunities for national initiative, passes under the sign of all-round support and strengthening of social and the political positions of the Oirat part of the population. The predominant attention to the Oirat population (on medical care, cultural and educational work, reform of housing conditions, agronomic guidance, legal advice, etc.) is already yielding very tangible results. 'True, the need is enormous. There are no funds, no workers, but nevertheless even the most remote aimaks (districts of Oirat region) and khoshuns (volosts) are penetrated by a paramedic, a club, a school, a medical center, a yurt-reading room, etc. the results, such as the appeal of the population itself for medical care and the withdrawal, however, is still very unknown eager, from the medicine practice of kamov or opening, at the initiative of the local population, shelves of mothers and children in a number of cooperatives. Let us make a reservation once again: a number of the facts we have indicated are still only in the nature of undertakings, the successful development of which will require a lot of funds, a lot of workers and a lot of time. Some of them can be realized only if there is a much broader development of the national initiative of the Oirat population than is available. A number of phenomena are of a single character and can be classified only as symptomatic. But these symptoms are indicative and (serve as a sure guarantee that the nascent Oirat Soviet society will overcome all obstacles and provide the region with a broad economic, social and cultural degeneration.

4. The position of the oyratka under Soviet rule
It is clear that no reform of the socio-economic structure of Oirat society is unthinkable without special work aimed at radically restructuring the relationship between a man and a woman, eliminating female powerlessness and female enslavement, which we spoke about in Chapter 2. and speech about any movement forward along the path of national, social, political and economic progress. Let us now see how, against this mixed background — against the background of everyday relations of pre-revolutionary Oiratia and against the background of the social and social reorganization that came with the Soviet regime — work is unfolding among women. First of all, it should be noted that the initial base and at the same time the ultimate goal of this work is full equality of rights between men and women, declared by Soviet legislation. In view of the inconsistency of this requirement with the actual everyday relations, and should seek special work among women. After all, a single decree, no matter how categorically defines any rights or obligations, by itself is not yet able to change human relations, especially where it is opposed by a custom that has been taking shape for hundreds of years. A stubborn and sometimes prolonged struggle for a new way of life is needed, a whole system of measures aimed at the gradual conquest of positions. This does not mean, of course, that in the event of some kind of conflict played out on the basis of the struggle between the old way of life and the new woman, the Soviet government will take some kind of conciliatory middle line, corresponding to the actually existing relations. On the contrary, it then wholly, 100 percent, remains on the side not of actual, but of decreed norms. But if there is no such conflict, then you have to fight for the introduction of a new order, mainly with the help of cultural and educational work, which consolidates, for example, for a woman the consciousness of her new rights and develops women's initiative, on the basis of which only her real is possible. emancipation '.' Let us explain this with an example. At a delegate meeting in one of the villages of Oiratia, the wife of a middle peasant was elected as a delegate. She was about to go — her husband would not let her. Since the desire to go to the meeting overpowered her usual obedience, she. protested and wanted to leave, despite her husband's ban. Then the latter locked her in a barn, and he went to the delegate meeting to listen to what the "women" would talk about. At the meeting at this time, the question of how to care for chickens and increase their egg production was discussed. The husband returned, released his wife and sent her to the meeting. Here is a case that should be carefully considered in the specific situation of Oirat life. Indeed, the very fact of / forcibly keeping the wife's home is, of course, illegal, and if the wife protested it before the appropriate authorities, the law and the authorities would certainly support her in this protest. But the whole point lies in the fact that the oiratka did not even think to protest against such treatment of herself, considering her husband's actions to be completely legal. Imagine now that at a meeting where the husband was, it would be said that a woman has every right to disobey her husband and act always on the basis of an independent opinion. What would the husband do then? Not only would he not have allowed his wife to attend this meeting, but he would have completely forbidden her from attending any meetings. That is why it is necessary to first lay the most general cultural and educational activity at the basis of work among Women, to clarify its consciousness, which is darkened by age-old customs, so that later, on the basis of the growing and developing, thus, activity of the female population itself, lead a more decisive struggle for female emancipation. And it should be noted that in Oiratia this business of cultural and educational work stands in especially difficult conditions, due to female domination, darkness and customs of the past. In fact, if we point out that until now, for example, a significant part of women themselves stand on the basis of the need to preserve kalym, thus considering the custom of buying and selling women to be quite normal, or that women still cannot take root a clear awareness of the economic independence of a woman, that the difficulties of work will become full. Does the above mean that the foundations of Soviet legislation in the part concerning the complete socio-political and economic equalization of women in rights with men do not have any meaning in Oirat reality? Of course not. Since Soviet legality in a number of cases gives the Oiratka a way out, which she did not have at all in pre-revolutionary conditions, the vitality of the new legal order is already affecting individual facts. This is especially true of the laws that establish a woman's right to divorce and receive alimonies and represent for her the only way out of the deadlock into which she was driven by the earlier state orders. The presence of such cases in the Voirat people's courts, although relatively u4 "with an insignificant, almost random percentage, testifies to this. Another feature of work among women in the conditions of Oirat reality is the need to bring to the fore the task of" reorganizing living conditions, in which the oirat lives. Indeed, what kind of cultural upsurge can there be if the yurt (and the entire living environment remains in that appalling condition, which we wrote about in the first chapter of this brochure. and beyond; e for the reorganization of all life in general, including the transition The most cultural ways of managing the economy are, perhaps, the most significant area of ​​the local front of the struggle for women's emancipation. Victory in it cannot be thought of and general success. The better that this work grows together with common work to pull up the backward elements of the entire Oirat society, including the male part.As we saw above, this direction of work among women not only does not revolt Oirats-men against the participation of their women in delegate meetings, but sometimes even challenges - they actively contribute to this work.According to the responses of the responsible leaders of the work among women in Oiratia, I am always present at every delegate meeting In addition to the delegates, there are also men who listen attentively to reports and conversations. The latter is very important, because to ensure a benevolent or even only tolerant attitude towards the work of the wives' apparatus on the part of the male population is a valuable achievement (In the conditions of the Oirat actuality. The fact is that, given the attitude towards women that dominates in everyday relations, and with the downtroddenness and obedience of women that takes place here, active resistance on the part of men could greatly paralyze, and very often, and paralyzes the most successful undertaking. In order to characterize this pernicious influence of everyday psychology, contemptuous of everything "babskoy", we will point out that even in the lower party organizations this psychology takes place. The secretary of the Mydralinskaya village village, the Ust-Kan aimak is asked: "Who is your cell organizer for work among peasant women?" : “I don’t know, it seems, the teacher.” The resolution of the Bureau of the Khakass OK of April 5, 1927 states: - “In the majority of paradise Party committees and cells do not consider work among delegates to be part of Party work; as a result, the leadership of some district committees and cells should be considered insufficient. " If thus, even in some parts of the party apparatus, they simply "forget" about the importance of working among women, then what can we say about the rest of the population, fed by old customs and traditions, accustomed to looking at women as property, and its social dignity. Before proceeding to the description of work among women, let us note another series of difficulties that hinder the development of this work at the required scale and pace. This is extreme worker poverty. It is quite obvious that work requires people who are well acquainted with the life and customs of the Oirats. Only an extremely cautious approach can lead the oirat to realize the full magnitude of the perspective. In many reports on the elimination of illiteracy, we find indications that an insignificant percentage of Oirat women who have passed the lyceum is explained by the fact that Oirat women do not go to a male teacher at all, being ashamed of him. The same fact also takes place in the work on sanitary and medical services for the population: oirat women do not go to a male doctor or a male paramedic. This detail alone emphasizes the difficulties that one has to face when creating a cadre of workers for work among Oirat women. And if we add to this the requirements of knowledge of language and everyday life, extreme poverty by the intellectual forces, moreover, for the most part put forward by the kulak elite of the population, it will be easy to understand that the main condition for the successful conduct of work among women is the need to create an asset of workers from among themselves. oiratok. And indeed, et'a (the task — the task of educating the appropriate cadre — is put forward by the women's department, which organizes here, as elsewhere in our (union, work among women. '' If for 56 women organizers, rural and aimak, there are only 3 oirat women, then we can state that in 1927, 24 women out of a total of 27 people passed the regional courses of the women's department, that several women were sent to obstetric courses, courses for patronage nurses, one Altai woman is in Moscow, at the Communist University of the Working People of the East !, and in the regional 8 Oyrat women are studying in the second year, and 12 students in the first year. The last figures are interesting in the sense that they characterize the relatively increasing rate of involvement of Oirats in studies and the preparation of female activists from the local population. We note in conclusion that the shortage and interruptions in the current work to a large extent have to be attributed to insufficient qualifications, sometimes even just illiteracy, some In spite of all its significance, this work is nevertheless preparatory to the accumulation of reserves and should determine in the future a wider development of tasks that are already being resolved now. The main form of work among women is the so-called delegate meetings. The latter aim to identify the most active part of the female population on the basis of electivity, to gather and organize it around certain points. By acting; the delegates, through conversations, reports and readings according to a certain program, in accordance with local conditions, it is possible to influence in this way the entire mass of the female population. Let us first give figures illustrating the number and growth of delegate meetings in Oiratia in recent years. Delegate meetings (points). ... ... .Number of delegates .................... Including oirats ................. 1925/26% Thus, we can state a certain increase in delegate meetings, and the fact that the participation of Oirat women in them has increased (an increase of over 30% in 1 year) is especially gratifying. This is also indicated by the following circumstance. In November 1925, a delegate meeting was organized for the first time among the nomadic Oirat women. Initially, it included only 6 people, including Fig. 1. Regional congress of women members of the village councils of Oiratek region. 1927, Ulala, number of 3 Russians. But by the end of January 1926, the number of delegates was 27, with the same number of Russians. It took a lot of effort to! overcome the inertia and inertia of the female population itself and paralyze the harmful influence of various prejudices (many oh-rats, for example, were afraid of being elected). But the main work on the initial organization has been done, and the delegate meetings, no matter how they have already taken their place in the Oirat reality. It is also interesting, of course, how the work of the meetings themselves proceeds. Meeting attendance is very high, according to most executives, reaching 70% in winter and 100% in summer. In addition to delegates, non-delegate women also attend delegate meetings, and sometimes the number of the latter even exceeds the number of delegates. Meetings are held frequently. So, for example, during the first half of the month in the Kulada tract, 6 meetings were held; in the Balyk-Tuyul and Kumurtak tracts, meetings also take place weekly. The main topics of delegate meetings are health education, protection of mothers and infancy, agronomic education, coverage of party work and a co-builder. What are the practical results of the work of delegate meetings? First of all, it should be noted that they cover not only delegates. Their influence is much broader. Not to mention the fact that delegates attend meetings, and in quite a significant number non-delegates, all visitors, communicating in everyday life with their relatives and neighbors, spread the information received at the meetings to the entire thickness of the female population. It is not uncommon for a delegate to hang up a poster taken at a meeting in her yurt and explain its meaning to the women gathered at her place. “In the tracts of Balyk-Tuyul and Kumurtak, the delegates introduce cleanliness in the dwellings, wash the dishes and wash themselves and do this in a demonstrative manner, that is ... the dishes are clean, BUT when they call in, they wash them again in front of their eyes. " (From the report of the women's department). These and similar facts indicate that, of course, it would be wrong to limit the significance of delegate meetings to the tasks of creating and educating women’s activists, although from this side they do a great job. Delegate meetings are already exerting a tremendous cultural influence on the entire female population of the region, re-educating her, informing her of new ideas and reorganizing her life. This position can be illustrated by a number of facts in addition to the above. Here are the most typical ones. The Antela delegates carry the children to the hospital, refusing the help of the kama, and send them to schools. In the same place, two delegates made a barnyard out of an abandoned yurt, saying: "There will be more and fatter milk," says the book and said so at the meeting. One delegate reports to her voters: “My dishes 3 times a week, I sweep the floor every day, I shake out my tulak” (sheepskin under the seat). Delegates of Ku-lada on an artel basis ordered a sewing machine. The Balyk-Tuyul delegates insisted that the Local Cooperation open a mother-and-child shelf, promising to phase out cow teats. The delegates of Chelushman and Kumurtak collected 4 poods of wheat, sowed it and harvested it for the elderly and homeless. In a number of places, delegates are sowing collective gardens. Moreover, once the awakened women's initiative is itself looking for shortcomings and holes in public affairs and is seeking to correct them. In one district, at the insistence of the delegates, boiling water was given to schoolchildren, firewood was brought in, and the school was repaired. In another (Anos), a group of delegates during the election campaign identified a speculator and achieved the deprivation of his voting rights. In many places the delegates brought their neighbors to the re-election. On the question of the influence of delegate meetings on the reorganization of everyday life, such decisions are interesting, for example: “To ask and persuade husbands to build huts, try to introduce cleanliness in yurts, take better care of children, to wash their shirts "(Ulagan), or such a characteristic fact: the Altai people of the Gordub tract decided to switch to the saddle and persuaded their husbands to do so. All of the above facts and many others that have been scattered throughout the region in recent years are not yet widespread. parts, these are single lights, flashing here and there, along the mountains and valleys of Altai, in individual ailas or tracts, often extinguishing and not yet flaring up into a powerful movement.But one must not forget, on the other hand, the colossal revolutionizing significance of these separate flashes for the oirat, who is downtrodden and has not yet managed to free herself from the age-old darkness and the stifling oppression of pre-revolutionary life. These flashes illuminate her way forward. work among women is not limited to employment. It is also necessary to note mass women's meetings, evenings of handicraft and spinning (gatherings. Women's meetings organized either on an aimag scale or in individual districts, in general, resemble delegate meetings, differing from the latter only in their coverage. The main frame here is delegates. These meetings are timed usually to some significant events in Oirat everyday life, [for example, the celebration of Women's Day or “Harvest Day.” Their influence on the reconstruction of everyday life and on the involvement of new layers of the female population in the work of delegate [meetings is confirmed by a significant increase! among the Oirat of interest in public work and identifying a number of new women activists from their midst. ”Handicraft evenings, in most cases gathering around women youth (Chemal) and spinning gatherings, attracting more elderly people (Ulala, On-gudai), are also successful among the female population, accompanied by conversations , mainly! sanitary and educational nature, or popular agricultural egg reports giving a number of practical instructions. In 1926, after 12 gatherings, 265 people were allowed to pass. The average attendance at such evenings is expressed, therefore, in 20-25 people. The work of women-legalizers in relation to conducting mass conversations should be especially highlighted. In 1926, 154 such conversations were held, including 39 specifically among Altai women. Work of this kind is also being carried out among the nomads through the assistance of Special nomadic agitators. The activity of the latter extends to the whole aimak, and he travels to separate natural boundaries, stopping every 2-3 days. Their service to the female population is, in most cases, an individual character or the character of a conversation with a small number of participants. In 1926, nomadic organizers conducted 53 conversations with 367 people in Ongudai, 46 conversations with 425 hours in Ulagan. From March to August 1927, 2,020 women were served and 531 conversations were held. | A striking indicator of the influence that all this work has on the female population of Oi-ratiya is, in addition to the above facts of the reconstruction of everyday life, also the participation of women in elections to councils. The figures that we will now cite, although they cannot be called comforting in their absolute value, nevertheless emphasize the lack of [the increasing activity of women, and in this sense are as indicative as examples of the transition to a new way of life. In 1924, 2,849 women participated in the elections, or 15.5% of the total number of those who participated in the elections, and in 1925 there were already 6,498 women, which accordingly increased the percentage of women participating in the elections to 38.7%, i.e. more than! 2 'times. Unfortunately, we do not have at our disposal data on the percentage of Russians and Oiratok throughout the region. But here is information about this ratio for one of the districts, which is probably typical for the entire region. There are 845 women out of 1.350 of all female voters. Of this number, 619 women took part in the elections, including 390 women. The participation of women in the work of councils is calculated in the following figures: in 1926, 135 women took part in the Aimak congresses of councils (against 79 in 1925), there were 10 women in the Aimak executive committees, 2 women in the revision commissions, and in cooperative bodies - 12 and In others (school councils, hospitals) - 26 women. The reports on the election campaign note an undoubted increase in women's activity, especially shown by the participants in delegate meetings. Many delegates brought their neighbors to the elections. In a number of places, the delegates, criticizing the activities of the village councils and giving instructions to the newly elected ones, pointed out, for example, that “the previous composition did not pay attention to women,” “the poor widows did not bother with any benefits,” demanding that these shortcomings be corrected in the work of the new council nurseries, etc. Summing up all of the above, we must first of all state the sharp difference between the position of the oiratka in the pre-revolutionary and post-revolutionary periods. If the new Soviet Oiratia inherited the difficult legacy of the old 'way of life, in the main it has not yet been broken even now, if a woman p now bears on her shoulders all the burden of housework and suffocates in the terrible conditions of housing mud, if her consciousness is still obscured by age-old slaughter and the habit of submitting Re-reasoning, if the male oppression makes her sometimes even fearfully shy away from the helping hand reaching out to her, an abyss has formed between the pre-revolutionary and modern Oirat. 'There was no movement for her, no hope of changing her position, no prospects. Here everything is in motion, everything is in change. 'Regardless of even (from her desire, the byratka fails to close herself in the circle of habitual rules, in the circle of semi-animal existence to which the old way of life was doomed to her. The rapid growth of the new society, the breakdown of the traditional way of life, traditional relations and traditional beliefs taking place around her, her best companions have already embarked on a new path promising such tempting prospects ahead of her. She still does not dare to follow them, still timidly looks around, listens, takes careful steps so that at the first hint of the danger of fearfully hiding in the usual female corner of the yurt. But she does not succeed in this one either. Her neighbor, seized by the pathos of building a New Life, rushes in to her, pulls her into a meeting, to elections, to a conversation, enthusiastically demonstrates her achievements, shows, explains, encourages, arouses her curiosity, awakens in her interest and introduces her to the great struggle for female emancipation. At their meetings such voices are heard: “We need to help the Soviet government”, “Soviet power of the Yaksha”, (good), “if there is war, Altai will go to war; no other government is needed. " "Still not possessing virtually all the full rights of a Soviet woman, still only embarking on the great path of new construction, she already closely ties her fate with the fate of Soviet power," she already firmly, with an unerring class instinct, knows that only with this power she If, thus, the assistance of broad masses of women, their full and unconditional sympathy and women's initiative, awakening to activity, guarantee a firm basis for Soviet policy, then those obvious shortcomings and gaps in work among women that are available. It is known that mistakes are made only where nothing is done. But there are mistakes that can be avoided, and which, in any case, must be quickly corrected. Among these kinds of mistakes, we must attribute some shortcomings in the work among the oirats. First, there is a completely insufficient amount of work on public health, in particular, on the protection of mothers and infants. Until recently, according to the information we have, there has been experience with only one nursery opened in one of the Oirat tracts, funded by the Red Cross of the Siberian Health Administration. This beginning, which is destined, no doubt, to play a huge role in the emancipation of the oiratka, from the very first steps showed all its vitality. In June 1926, when the nursery was opened, 194 children passed through them, including 36 from Yuyrat. But already in August, the number of Oirat children doubled. In a number In the districts, the female population itself puts forward demands on the organization of nurseries and on the arrangement of shelves for mothers and children in cooperatives (that is, the selection of all kinds of products, such as a nipple, sponges for washing, providing normal hygienic care for the child). Meanwhile, work in this area is developing at an insufficient pace. The lack of funds and workers, of course, explains this slowdown, but nevertheless in no way excludes the need for increased attention, in the "concentration of fire" on this sector of the women's front. Secondly, the situation with the elimination of the Oirats is completely unsatisfactory. illiteracy. The reports point to poor female attendance at the sites where men work as liquidators. In addition, they unanimously emphasize the lack of literature, the lack of posters and other manuals. Be that as it may, it is necessary to intensify the work to eliminate illiteracy, perhaps by creating special women's educational centers, as some delegates from the Oirat community suggest doing. True, in recent years the work on the elimination of illiteracy has been somewhat revitalized and measures have been taken to provide benefits! (posters were ordered and the regional department of engineering issued 5 brochures in the Altai language). Nevertheless, the total number of 362 women per 1231 students is clearly insufficient and does not correspond to both the sex ratio in Oiratiya and the lower literacy rate among the female half of the population of Oiratia. Thirdly, there is almost no work to attract Oirats into cooperation. Not to mention the almost complete absence of Oirat participation in the bodies of cooperative management, even the number of Oirats, members of the cooperation, is absolutely negligible and measured in insignificant numbers. limited to units (18 for 1926). This phenomenon is abnormal, especially if you accept the role of the court in the protection of women's rights, in the elimination of pre-revolutionary relations between a woman and a man on the basis of the new Soviet legality; In Ulal, it is true, there is also a legal section of the regional department, which includes 25 women, mostly Russians (20 of them have already done practical work as public prosecutors and defenders). But this, of course, is not enough. And in this area it is necessary to develop more energetic activity. Finally, fifthly, energetic anti-religious propaganda should be developed. The religious beliefs of the oiratka, darkening her consciousness and keeping her in constant fear, have an extremely negative impact on the process of her liberation and are at the same time a very formidable weapon in the hands of the kams, naturally restored after forgiving the policies of the Soviet regime. The latter contrasts them with witchcraft quackery — a hospital, their fantastic explanations of various phenomena — a popular book, their practice of appeasing evil spirits, in case of any economic adversity — agricultural training. It is possible that the insufficiently energetic struggle in this area is explained by the fear of sharply reviving the Kamov against themselves with their powerful influence on “backward groups of the population. But, on the one hand, the kams, representing the top of the old society and being the keepers of the old way of life, will still fight against female emancipation, whatever forms it takes. On the other hand, the Soviet regime is not on the path with the Kamas, even if they do not occupy a hostile position. Now, when the main reserves have already been accumulated, the cause of anti-religious propaganda must be advanced in battle. As we can see, there are shortcomings in the work. And these shortcomings are sometimes significant. Nevertheless, looking back at the path traveled, counting victories and defeats, evaluating enemies and allies, we can state with firm confidence that on the basis of the indisputable revival of the activity of the female population of Oiratia, the awakening of its TEIR, clear initiative, is a great thing! emancipation of the woman of this small, so unhappy in the past country, goes on a wide road. And the emancipation of the Oiratka is a guarantee of the socio-political and economic prosperity of Oiratia. When writing this brochure, in addition to ethnographic works, the author used materials provided by the Scientific Association of Oriental Studies at the Central Executive Committee of the USSR and the Department of Workers and Peasants of the Central Committee of the CPSU (b).