3. Yakut under Soviet rule.
When we generally talk about the work of the Soviet government in Yakutia, we must bear in mind three circumstances. This is, firstly, a protracted civil war, which inflicted severe blows on the economic and socio-political organism of the country, and only very recently made it possible to start peaceful socialist construction. Secondly, it is the isolation of the YSSR from the rest of the RSFSR, which, due to the distance and the harsh climate, prevents a lively and fruitful exchange with the RSFSR, both economic and cultural and political. Thirdly, it is a relatively low level of the general cultural condition of the masses and an acute shortage of workers who are well acquainted with the local conditions and the population and who can be used for active work to raise self-activity among the population. This last factor is especially painfully reflected in the female sector of the general struggle for national emancipation, being complicated by the lesser culture of the masses, and by everyday traditions that have brought up submissiveness and humiliation in women. Nevertheless, already now it is possible - definitely to speak - of those tremendous shifts that have been outlined in the legal, economic and everyday situation of women, and to state the emergence and existence of a certain women's movement, which has as its ultimate goal the complete emancipation of women, which should appear One of the main prerequisites for the further economic and socio-political development of the region. First of all, one must be aware of the enormous role played in the conditions of Yakut reality by the legal norms of the Soviet disposition, fixing the equality of women and in relation to men. They have truly cut windows to the future, symbolically speaking. The basic foundation has been laid, and a solid foundation has been laid for the women's movement. Strong support is provided for the Soviet apparatus and the leading proletarian ideology in a number of individual conflicts arising from the economic exploitation or domestic oppression of women. Along these milestones, along these natural runoffs, individual facts and individuals are already seeping through like streams under the spring sun, so that the thawed masses of centuries of shackled women's initiative and initiative rushed after them. First of all, Soviet legislation 'completely sweeps aside those economic restrictions with which they bound, as we saw above, the Yakut woman is a remnant of clan law and everyday traditions. As far as we have, a businessman with agricultural, or rather cattle-breeding-agricultural economy, this concerns mainly the abolition of restrictions in the sense of the use of land and livestock. Previously, a Yakut woman could not have land at all; according to the land code and the YATSIK's resolution (dated April 1, 1924), which supplements and develops it, on the radical equalizing distribution of land, she receives this right on an equal basis with a man. All restrictions that previously stipulated her rights on partitions or inheritance are now abolished. Let's remember that if! before, for example, a father died, whose household was run by his daughters, heirs or, in any case, joint heirs, his brothers, nephews or other male relatives. Now this way of inheritance has been drastically changed; attempts to circumvent this order by means of forms of ownership under the guise of upbringing or custody are rebuffed: in any case, they are not allowed without official fixation in a strictly established manner. But not only in the field of land relations and the right of ownership of livestock extends the concern of the Soviet government to ensure the economic position of the Yakut woman. Below, speaking about the work of the women's department, we will note the attempts to conquer new branches of employment for women. But the above is enough. Indeed, -: if we recall that until quite recently women, and especially girls (aged 1 to 10-12 years), were themselves an object of trade, an ordinary commodity sold on the market next to agricultural products (there were often cases when a girl, often naked, but wrapped in hare skins, lined with hay and put in a bag made of animal skin, was taken to the market to sell for 2 / g pounds of cow butter, 1 pood of flour and 3 rubles of money, and it was a good price), if we recall further that their families also traded adult girls, selling for kalym, then the enormous role of even the most general provisions of Soviet law in the emancipation of the Yakut woman becomes clear. Equally important is the marriage code establishing the right of a Yakut woman to divorce. It hits the very thick of everyday traditions that protected women's lawlessness and opens up completely new perspectives for the Yakut woman. The fact is that, as we have already said, in pre-revolutionary life there was no place for divorce, and with it there was no opportunity for a woman to leave the power of her husband, cruel or 'merciless in the sense of using the woman's labor: even in the case of escape, the clan gave wife back. And if these escapes were quite rare, in view of the habits of hard work and submission the position of a woman, on the one hand, and the relatively soft and peaceful relationship between husband and wife, on the other, nevertheless, their presence indicates the existence of a dead end, the absence of a way out in a number of cases, because a useless and aimless escape cannot be considered a way out. This impasse has been broken, this way out is found — in the rules governing divorce at the present time. And if divorce, generally speaking, does not have a mass character among the Yakuts, then it undoubtedly made life easier, if not saved many Yakut women and is a factor that has an extremely beneficial effect on softening family relations, on regulating the treatment of a husband with his wife. It puts an end to unrestrained, sometimes, male arbitrariness and strengthens the position of women in the struggle for greater independence in the family. Finally, the third "whale" that determines the fruitfulness of the common work in the emancipation of the Yakut woman, along with economic and social norms, is cultural and educational work. True, the network of schools, reading rooms and other cells of enlightenment work is still extremely small, it cannot yet be called satisfactory even to a small degree, but the number of students, albeit slowly, is growing, at which the percentage of girls in education is steadily increasing, everywhere committees for the elimination of illiteracy, at times persistently developing a network of liquidation centers, and the growing activity of the female masses is noticed everywhere. It is necessary, of course, 'to note the colossal difficulties that stand on this path and are due to the insignificance of the social skills of the Yakut, the traditions and life of the prisoner in the family circle. In fact, pioneers and pioneers of women's education must make their way into each yurt, engage in individual processing of each woman, which, of course, is extremely difficult given the scattered settlements and the small number of workers. But in this respect, a start has been made, and the extraordinary greed for knowledge of individual Yakut women, which we will talk about below, indicates that the path is correct, albeit difficult. Work is also worthwhile in close connection with educational and political education work. on health education, which, in connection with the phenomena indicated by us, is extremely important. The Yakut woman does not wash and does not wash clothes during the entire winter period, i.e. almost 8 months a year. She lives in a yurt, often associated with a khoton, in an appallingly antihygienic environment. Hence the enormous spread of diseases, mainly tuberculosis, and a colossal percentage of deaths. It is clear that some of the first measures taken by the Soviet government were directed in this direction. Since the development of a network of medical institutions and medical personnel rests on a lack of funds and workers - on the one hand, and on the specific difficulties associated with the large distance between villages, and the difficulties, hence, service - I must admit that the situation is very, very bad ', almost disastrous. This is noted in their reports by the members of the Vilyui-Aldan special medical and sanitary detachment of the expedition of the Academy of Sciences, which has been working since 1925 under the leadership of Dr. Schreiber. But it is already gratifying that the population, fully aware of the disaster, treats the work of doctors with great confidence, gradually lagging behind the old methods of treatment practiced by shamans (Yakut sorcerers), and attentively listens to medical and hygienic instructions. On the other hand, the government of Yakutia issued a special decree (April 1, 1924) on the separation of khotons from shrt, which is partially mandatory and in every possible way (subsidies, preferential loans, bonuses, discounts on agricultural taxes, etc.) encouraging low-power farms. In the living conditions of the average Yakut cattle breeder, this measure is of paramount importance and will save hundreds of lives, especially women's lives. These, in general terms, are the first direct results of Soviet policy, taken in the most general, principled setting. But, of course, for the successful implementation of "good" intentions, one cannot limit oneself to a simple declaration of women's rights. Do not forget that in the conditions of Yakut reality, you have to literally break open the door of every yurt, sometimes tightly nailed for a woman by centuries of darkness and everyday traditions. In order to achieve the embodiment of new norms in social life and everyday life, or at least only to paralyze the most painful manifestations of the old way of life, you need to put in a lot of work and patience, you need a whole cadre of persistent and knowledgeable workers, organized around a special 'apparatus. Since we are talking about work among women in Yakutia, such an apparatus, as elsewhere in the USSR, is the women's department, and its workers are the advanced detachments of women themselves. But I must say that the work of the women's department rests in Yakutia against a number of specific difficulties that greatly weaken its activities. These difficulties, first of all, include the lack of a cadre of trained workers or women workers who are sufficiently closely related to the local population and who can be used for active work among female masses. Further, it should be noted that the social atmosphere is very unsatisfactory, which creates favorable conditions for the development of negative trends on the issue of attracting women to public work. At best, there is complete indifference; this is especially clearly manifested in the fact that even some party organizations (Olekminskaya — 1923) considered it necessary to begin a struggle against the indifferentism of the party masses to work among women. The third reason is the physical and geographical conditions, which, due to the isolation of the YASSR, the lack of communication routes within the country and the harsh climate, prevent the attraction of workers from the RSFSR. Despite this, the regional women's department has already managed to do an enormous amount of work and ensure its continuous development both in depth and in breadth. The first task that he had to solve was the task of organizing a cadre of female workers closely related to the local population. To this end, the local party school for the appropriate study attracted and attracts the possible, if honestly party Yakuts, fresh forces in the future, Lna fight for the emancipation of women (33 women in 1925). In spite of, further, the initial shortage of female workers, the women's department nevertheless, immediately after its inception, develops work among the broad masses of women. Naturally, first and. predominantly this work is concentrated in urban centers. Its main form is delegate meetings, which have acquired a fairly large significance. As a result of the very first year of work, which spread to naslegs, elections are given from 4 to 16% / 0 women in the total number of council members (in the Yakutsk district — 647 women, in the Vilyuysky district — 129, in the Olekminsky — 48). Then, even (autumn 1925), 3 women were elected to the YATSIK. In order to fully appreciate this fact, it is necessary to recall the conditions of the everyday situation, which were mentioned above. But this is only an external indicator of the shift that took place among the masses under the influence of the revolution. Its internal indicator is the intense energy with which the delegates relate to their work. And here it should be noted that among other national groups, Yakut women occupy the first place. In Yakutsk, for example, the delegate corps is divided into three sections: Yakut, Tatar, and Russian. The most active - (according to the direction of the head of the women's department, the Yakut women show a full percentage of attendance at both weekly meetings and educational programs. , hospitals and labor exchange). Their agitational, cultural, educational and semi-educational role is enormous. Of these, persistent pioneers of the women's movement in Yakutka are gradually developing. He seeks to create such economic conditions for a woman that would allow her to defend her independence and relieve her of purely family responsibilities. For this latter purpose, he is waging an intensified struggle for the development of a network of playgrounds, and the next result of his activities in this direction was the creation in 1926 of several new playgrounds at various personal organizations (a team of metalworkers, a prison house, GPU> and others). On the initiative of the women's department, a typing circle for the unemployed was organized at the GPU. Zhenotdel organized a sewing artel, which employs 30 women, earning from 1 p. 50 k. Up to 5 rubles a day (and 2 canteens served exclusively by women. In view of the lack of funds for equipment, a number of performances were held, the income from which made it possible to arrange an artel of shitnits. In addition to cultural and educational work, work on strengthening the economic situation of women, the women's department is working to protect the rights of women in the analysis of court cases.To this end, it has organized a special legal circle, whose members act in the courts as defenders of women's interests and monitor the correctness of various kinds of legal acts in the relevant The following case is interesting and characteristic in this respect: a woman recently sold her 14-year-old daughter to a rich old man in Yakutsk. When registering a marriage in the police, a woman from the department of women found out and, of course, took the girl away with her. And such cases, as well as the sale of female workers under the guise of "adopted daughters," still take place. As we see, here it is necessary to develop and All the above information refers to the work of the women's department in Yakutsk and is indicative enough to understand its breadth and significance. As a result of this work, one can state a sharp increase in the activity of the female mass and an extraordinary increase in the desire for knowledge. There are frequent cases when (An ordinary Yakut girl arrives in the city to study, while working at the same time to provide for herself. This is how the study goes: she studies 20 days a month, and GO works for days on hard day or piecework work. But not only in Yakutsk, relatively well-stocked with workers (1 - department head, 5 instructors, 290 delegates in the district) - the women's movement is growing throughout the region, grouping around the organizations of the women's department, although, of course, the situation is most favorable in Yakutsk, and there is a whole a number of not only individual places, but even districts where it, one might say, almost never began. This is overtaken, first of all, by the weakness of the instructor staff. Thus, there is only one instructor for the entire Aldan district. In the Vilyui district, with 2 instructors, a delegate corps is working quite successfully, taking patronage over the orphanage, a group of girls for the study of the Komsomol movement and an artel of shitnits are organized, the funds for the maintenance of which are obtained by arranging performances. In the Olekminsky district, with 1 instructor, there is a delegate corps of 47 people. In Bulunsky, Verkhoyansk and Kolymsky districts, there are absolutely no special workers for work among women (as above, according to 1926 data). Nevertheless, there are also 25 delegates here, a drama circle and a team of laundresses have been organized.As a result, a new type of nascent female worker is emerging in YASSR, for example, in Aldan, which is already found in significant numbers. In addition to the party, its women's department and the Komsomol organizations, in the work among women, "Khim-Nichit", an organization that unites the local poor and plays an important role in the life of the working masses of Yakutia, takes a significant part. Especially it should be noted her activity in relation to economic assistance to female artels and singles. As we can see, the work has just begun. It is concentrated mainly in Yakutsk and other urban settlements, has not yet penetrated into the yurt, has not yet developed in depth and has not spread over the vast expanses of Yakutia. Darkness and the remnants of everyday traditions stand in its way. However, a start is made, an example is shown.! More and more pioneers of the women's movement are becoming, and each woman who joins it pulls two of them. The cadres of new women who take part in public life and those who are released economically are growing. In the summer of 1926, the first ulus playground with 30 children was opened. Let it be a sign that the movement for the emancipation of women has already spilled over from urban centers into uluses and naslegi. Oppressed by work and life, sick due to ignorance, submissive from downturn, it is time for a Yakut woman to take part in the grandiose construction that embraces the fraternal republics of the USSR. For Yakutia, this will mark a new era, an era of economic and socio-political flourishing.