3. Work among the Marieks during the years of the revolution
The October Revolution created objective opportunities for improving the position of the Mari, her emancipation From the very first day of the October Revolution, the activity of the Mari awakens, work is expanding widely and captures such a previously completely abandoned world of women. Work among women has begun systematically only in the last 3-4 years. The famine of 1921, when 5-6 people died every day in some villages, a number of natural disasters that joined it forced all attention to be focused on them. But it should be noted that this same famine contributed to the further rapprochement of the Mari with the Russian proletariat and peasantry, accelerated it. The great help rendered to them by the center, as well as by the peasants of the Ivanovo-Voznesensk and Kostroma provinces, speaks of this rapprochement. After the liquidation of the consequences of the famine, it became possible to start in-depth work on other fronts. It would seem difficult to expect great results from her, but they are on the face. The new way of life is being introduced into the consciousness of the Mari not immediately, but gradually. The Soviet government gave the Mari women equality in family life, property and other rights, but it was necessary to translate all this into reality, to put it into practice. The difficulty lay in the lack of culture, downtroddenness and isolation of the Mari, generated by the economic situation of her life. Here is what the workers among the Mariek say: “Her isolation, distrust, and shyness are more developed in her than in the Russian peasant woman. You cannot approach a Mari woman at once, she will not open her soul to you; before she will take a closer look at you, listen, learn the opinion of neighbors; having learned from all sides, seeing that they want to do something good for her, she, like a child, will reach out to you, reveal all the sore sides of her nondescript life, go to work, and take an active part in the social life of the village. " These features were supposed to leave their mark on the entire work. The Mari peasant woman needed people who knew her way of life, her language, she needed workers who spent a long time with her so that she would abandon her isolation. And of course, at first it was difficult to provide the village with such workers. They just weren't there. After all, the Mari woman was in such conditions that she did not even think about social work. Meanwhile, it was the Mari village, with its backward way of life, and at the same time with the developing class stratification, that demanded the organization of women, their early involvement in this life and struggle. The main work among the Marie peasant women was at first difficult. Zhenotdels, in most cases, extended their activities more to urban areas, where there are only a few Mari people. Such an unusual form for a Mari village, such as delegate meetings, took root slowly. By habit, Marika sat at home and it was difficult to involve her in meetings, even those where the most painful issues for her were discussed. Delegate meetings grew gradually, like islands in this endless sea of ​​old life and customs, with which they had to wage a decisive struggle. Dai delegates were originally numbered in units. The smallest number of them was at first in the village. But work among Mariekas is work among peasant women. The lack of a wide coverage of the peasant masses was the main drawback of the first period of work. The small number of women's departments, the lack of workers in them, was one of the most important reasons for the lack of sufficient work in the countryside. The Mari peasant woman herself needed a lot of preliminary agitation work. A careful and skillful approach was needed. Work was carried out in the first period, most often through the convening of conferences, there was no firm plan and systematicity. Delegate meetings represented something unprecedented for a Mari village — peasant women only gradually got used to seeing them as their school. The main question of the success of the delegate meetings was, therefore, the question of the involvement of the Mariaks, for at first the overwhelming majority were Russians, while the Mariiks were numbered in a few. Only after being attracted to delegate meetings, they could then be involved in the work of Soviet institutions and in public life in general. The growth figures of the participants in these meetings are an indicator of success in involving the Mari women in public life and Soviet construction. If five years ago there were only 116 delegates, of which there was an insignificant percentage of Marieks (no more than 10%), then by October 1926 this number had increased almost 15 times, and the percentage of Marieks-peasants in it was brought to half of the entire composition ... The work, which thus began with the involvement of individuals, has now shifted into the area of ​​involvement of the widest masses. In particular, a lively work has been done on delegate meetings in recent years. Planning and regularity have already been introduced into this work. The election of delegates is going on lively, with the unrelenting active participation of all the poor and middle peasants of the Mari village. The adoption of a firm course for in-depth work among the Mariek peasant women was marked by a number of very important events. Together with growth of delegate meetings, more and more embracing the Mari village — the work takes them beyond them and embraces the Mariiks who are not organized in delegate meetings. Suffice it to point out that since March 1926, 180 meetings of peasants have been held, in which, in addition to the delegates, 3,600 peasant women participated. Following the grassroots meetings, district and canton women's non-party conferences were held; It is interesting to note that the last Mariiks accounted for 3/4. These events revived the work, linking delegates' meetings with the ordinary mass of Mariik peasants with close ties: the fact that they passed alive; the isolation of the latter is destroyed before our eyes. A number of issues on the agenda, closely related to the life of the Mari, deeply interested the peasant women. In addition to conferences, the department of workers and peasants established a close relationship with the village, which is carried out not only in the form of written guidance, but also live instruction and direct communication with the places. The last one. 'is permanent. Regular visits to the village are carried out by the women's department, and in addition, a number of comrades have made numerous visits and work in rural areas specially assigned to them. Communists, Komsomol members and delegates from the city take part in this work. In addition, systematic conversations are held. reading and group work among Marieki women not covered by the delegates' meeting. These conversations strive to give the peasant woman understandable, close and at the same time interesting material to her — questions of everyday life, agricultural issues, etc. Since March 1926, 101 such conversations have been held. On a regional scale, several “In order to get as close as possible to the Mari department of the region, it was decided to organize all the work in the Mari language (holding delegate meetings in the Mari regions, etc.). This task required the nomination of a cadre of organizers of women's work from among the Marieks themselves. In 1926, of the total number of organizers, the mari accounted for 55/0. In addition to instructive and agitation-organizational work, women who are not involved in delegate meetings are ‘united along purely practical undertakings. Peasant women’s corners and handicraft circles were created. Such events are extremely important in the environment of a Mari village - a Mari woman is a natural-born needlewoman I willingly goes to needlework circles, while the latter create a good basis for political and educational work. With a cultural and educational purpose, "red work sittings" are organized. They have; . its goal is to combat the aimless pastime of every Mari girl, expressed in traditional gatherings. The dangers of the latter have already been discussed. Therefore, the organization {"red work sittings", where girls both work and are brought up, freeing themselves from the burden of age-old prejudices, is a matter of particular importance in the Mari village. It should be noted here that, as soon as the Mari woman understands the essence of such events, she does her best to support them. It has already been said about those fragments of the old way of life that still gravitate over the Mari. We have seen their harmfulness and antihygiene — for example, clothing. The custom of wearing a heavy headdress is firmly rooted in the Mari village, and such a seemingly simple matter as fighting it is put on the line as an extremely important issue, the resolution of which requires a lot of energy. Through the work of the delegates' meeting, conversations, campaigns are systematically conducted for updating the Mari costume, for replacing it with a more convenient and hygienic one. The results of this work are already showing. Among the Marieks there are such brave loners who throw off their age-old clothing and replace it with a more modern one. Recently, the transition of this movement from the stage of isolated successes to more significant results has been outlined. The Mari also enjoys the rights that the October Revolution won for her, the right to economic separation in case of divorce, etc. If earlier she was completely deprived of rights in relation to use property, now she is aware of this right and often appeals to the department of workers and peasant women with a request to protect her property and other interests. Gradually, the Mari people are being drawn into other professions, which constituted the monopoly of men before the revolution. It should be noted that not only grassroots organizations have achieved great success in involving Mariaks in their apparatus. In the cantonal women's departments, as well as in the leadership of delegate assemblies, the Mari is a majority. Such a composition makes them closer to the Mariika and serves as a guarantee of more successful work. The work of the delegate meetings is the most indicative, for it is the nucleus that groups all the active Mariika women around itself. However, what is described here is only part of the great work that has been done during the years of the revolution in all areas of the struggle for the emancipation of the Mari. Delegate meetings, teaching the Mari to participate in public life, to the Soviet construction, nominate the active women for direct participation in this construction, involving them in the work of party, Soviet and professional institutions. This work of involvement turns out to be the most difficult. An illiterate, downtrodden Mari woman has been withdrawn from any social life for too long and does not soon learn to take part in it. Often she wants this, but she still feels incapable, weak, to work actively. Therefore, the Mari people in the party are still a rare phenomenon (no more than 2%). But even here, in recent years, great opportunities have been outlined for involving the Marieks in the party, since in the near future the number of them - those who have passed the school of delegate meetings, the school of practical work in a number of Soviet organizations - will undoubtedly increase, and they will feel sufficiently prepared for the party work. The situation is somewhat better with the involvement of Mariek girls in the Komsomol. Here, first of all, it is necessary to note the great attraction to the Komsomol on the part of the girls themselves, who are already dissatisfied with the old way of life. They are looking for a new, participation in public life. However, there are a number of obstacles that need to be removed. One of the obstacles is the opposition of parents who disagree with the violation of traditional foundations, who are afraid that a girl who has ended up in the Komsomol or in general 'for public work, ceases to obey her parents. Therefore, they often do not allow their daughters to attend peasant meetings, etc. In this respect, a lot of work is done through the aforementioned handicraft circles, which enjoy great sympathy among the peasant masses. There, the girl can receive the guidance she is looking for, wanting to break with the old way of life that weighs on her. In terms of the growing attraction of girls to public life, the fact of her participation in various conferences and congresses is indicative. So at the regional congress of Mari women in March 1926, many girls were present, and the question of work among them naturally attracted the attention of the congress, which pointed out the role of needlework schools, as well as the desirability of attracting cells of the Komsomol and school workers. The involvement of Mariek women in Soviet construction is yielding good results. Gradually, both the lower and central apparatus are being covered. The activity of women working in the Soviet apparatus is growing all the time, and the increase from year to year in the number of women elected to councils shows that they have managed to justify the confidence placed in them. If the campaign for re-election of councils in the early years (1921-23) attracted a not particularly significant number of women, then in the campaign of 1925-26, women accounted for 25% of all voters. Women took an active part in the congresses of the councils, volost, canton and regional. The number of women elected to councils and other elected organizations (cooperatives, etc.) is constantly growing. If in 1922/23 22 peasant women were elected to the district councils, then in 1925/26 the number of those elected only to the village councils reached 377 people. Accordingly, the percentage of Marieks (of the total number of women) is growing. (Thus, in 1926, out of 148 delegates elected to various institutions, 60 were Mariaks.) You often come across stories in our press about how a Mari woman is gaining equality. The emancipation of the Mari outside the Mar-region follows approximately the same paths. Even in Bashkiria, far from Maroblast, where a group of Mari lives, preserving their national identity, this movement is taking over the Mari. So among the population of a number of villages, the Mari girl Ekalcha won great authority, at the age of 22 she became the chairman of the village council. The story of this girl is similar to the stories of many Mariek social activists. In 1923 she was completely illiterate. Elected as a delegate, she eliminated her illiteracy, then she was elected to the village council, and soon also to the chairperson.1 She established herself as an active, good worker, and not for nothing at village meetings, * you only hear exclamations: "Ekalcha", "Ekalcha ! " Mariyka begins to occupy public elective positions not only in councils, but also in cooperation bodies, judiciary, trade unions, etc. The figures at the end indicate the extent of this participation. The huge percentage (93%) of illiteracy among Mariiks makes it a question of education very urgent. This also makes it difficult to solve. It cannot be said that everything necessary was done here. But what has already been done is absolutely extraordinary in the setting of an almost entirely previously illiterate Mari village. School education was almost non-existent for the Mari before the revolution. But from the first days after the revolution, the Mari, albeit slowly, began to conquer the school, and the further, the faster this conquest goes. The number of Mariek students in grade I schools is growing all the time. Gradually, the Mari woman is making her way to the secondary school, although so far in smaller numbers than in the first stage schools. She even goes to higher educational institutions now, and every year she gives several dozen marieks sent to various educational institutions. In universities, the Mari woman shows herself to be very capable. In the work of national communities created by the university young people almost everywhere outside the region where the Mari study, x) the Marian takes an active part. Many, probably, had to meet with such Mari social activists, students in universities. The Mari woman took an active part in staffing various courses that have been in the region in recent years (obstetric school, courses for training village workers, courses for nursery workers, as well as political schools). If, already in 1926, 2,500 Mariek girls were enrolled in grade I schools * 2), this means "a great achievement on the front of education. Work is also systematically developing to eradicate illiteracy among the adult population through 190 educational centers available in the region. I had to pro, to do work to eliminate illiteracy among the Mariik delegates. If we compare this with the pre-revolutionary time, when a Mari woman did not dream not only of secondary or higher, but also of a lower school, it must be said that the work of cultural liberation of Mariikn gives nice results. A lot of preliminary work was needed so that the Mari woman understood the need for enlightenment and went to study herself. And here the revival of work has been falling for the last two years. Until 1924-25, it was rare to meet a Mari woman in courses, in schoolchildren, circles, etc. — recently it ceases to be new and she, for the most part, goes on her own — asks to be taught or sent to study ... It is interesting to note that the male Mari, who had previously looked so unkindly at attempts at enlightenment, have recently begun to treat this more favorably. After a conversation with one organizer of women in a Mari village, the men told her: “You were telling the truth, we need to teach our women,” and asked her to come again. It remains to get acquainted with one more, also very important area of ​​work - health care and, in particular, the protection of mothers and infants ... In particular, the latter is important, since the primary task is to wrest the Mari out of this oppressive environment in which he still grew up and teach the Mari to take care of their children not with the help of the barbaric means of village midwives and healers. the Mari village is gradually being replaced by medical care. Already, about 10% of births take place with the help of midwives or doctors. The cadres of midwives trained by the obstetric technical school - in most of the Marieks, it is hoped, will finally nullify the importance of midwives and healers. And, finally, it is important to teach the Mari to seek medical help, to shake her faith in “native” medicine. In this regard, educational work plays an important role. The medical staff, in addition to their current work, have to turn to the fight against this "indigenous" medicine, which, although it is not widespread now, but in remote places remains in all its strength. The main scourge of the Mari village is the rapid spread of domestic diseases, aggravated unsanitary conditions and ignorance. These include trachoma, scabies, and malaria. Trachoma is more developed in meadow mari. According to the health department, about 25% of Mari is infected with trachoma. The fight against it is being conducted so vigorously that it is already possible to talk about its final elimination in the near future. An increasingly significant number of patients are beginning to use medical help leading them to recovery. The work on the line of health education is carried out by the joint efforts of the medical staff and the women's work bodies -] by arranging lectures, conversations, systematic,; instructing, etc. And here the Mari woman takes a great part in the work in the person of her delegates. In 1925, a traveling exhibition on the care and feeding of a child was organized in the region. This is how a Mari woman learns how to care for children. However, before achieving success in this area too, we had to face the opposition of the old way of life, expressed in little sympathy, at first, on the part of the Mari for health measures and institutions for the protection of mothers and infants. So, for example, at first, the Mari people never wanted to send their children to a nursery, since they did not even understand their meaning well. In 1922, there were a number of cases when peasant women did not want to carry their children in organized, equipped and fully equipped village nurseries. The nursery was empty and the next year they did not open in these places. And only after a series of explanatory campaigns, which were able to explain to the Mari woman all the usefulness of this undertaking, she began to willingly send children to a nursery. Every year 36 crèches function in the region during the summer. The courses for the training of nursery workers, which gave many trained nursery workers from among the Mariiks themselves, further strengthened the importance of the nursery in the eyes of the population.It should be noted another fact that significantly contributed to the popularity of institutions for the protection of mothers and infants among the population and their actual approach to the mass of Mari. In 1926, in the midst of the Mari population, in Arbany, where anti-sledges flourished most brightly Tariya and ignorance was translated "baby's house", from now on began to serve exclusively the Mari population. Consultation, both medical and legal, is widely used through the authorities of the okhmatmlad. Mariyka learns to seek advice on various issues, begins to see her defenders in maternity protection institutions. Councils of social assistance have been organized in a number of places, which are so necessary for the previously helpless in this respect, the Mariika.Of course, this small booklet cannot exhaust all forms of work and all its achievements. But even this fragmentary and incomplete information can be used to judge the radical upheaval that is taking place before our eyes in the life of a Mari woman, from a downtrodden and ignorant woman becoming a fighter in the public arena, accustomed to working and gaining equal rights. the women among whom the work is carried out belong to the poor and middle peasants of the village, and thus, the woman is drawn into the class struggle, helping the poor elements of the Mari village. The congress of Mari women, held in March 1926, summed up the work done over the years of the revolution to emancipate the Mari, and noting its negative and positive points about which were mentioned in this book, recognized it as quite satisfactory, and approved the general line of work. Of course, there is still a lot of work ahead, but its basic foundation has been laid quite firmly and it is to be hoped that in the future the work will continue at an ever faster pace, gaining sympathy and support from the working Mari woman herself. show the successes and achievements mentioned here.