3. Work among the votyachki during the years of the revolution. Construction of a new way of life
After a series of disasters, the Votyak village is recovering quickly; in it, along with general work, there is work among women. She is very difficult, but also very grateful. Until recently, the eye had a preparatory character, because, before deploying it systematically, it was necessary to create sufficiently justified methods of work, to create a correct approach to the peasant woman. From among the latter, it was necessary to create ranks of women workers, it was necessary to gradually involve women in social construction, and then to carry out a wide educational work. In order to more clearly imagine the work done among women-warriors during the years of the revolution, and the changes taking place in this regard, in the everyday life, we will tell you successively about its participation in all manifestations of social life. The involvement of women votyachka in party work is a difficult task already because the votyachka is little accustomed to organization and discipline. That is why there are still so few votes in party organizations — about 10%, all women are party members, and no more than 2o / o of the total number of members. This is also explained by the fact that a married woman often does not consider it possible to carry out party work, due to her occupation with housework. In this respect, girls are more free. That is why the Komsomol in the Votyak village is the most positive moment in terms of involving women. Gradually the votyachka gets used to it - here it is to party work, and the population itself, as we have already said, willingly opposes the Komsomol organizations to traditional gatherings. Votyachka is not limited, however, to ordinary participation in these organizations, but is gradually getting used to more responsible work. So, we see votyachkas in the district women's departments and in other governing bodies. The central core of work among the votyachi is, of course, the delegate corps. The very growth of the delegate corps speaks for the rapid pace at which the votyachki are being drawn into social construction, just as the consciousness of the peasants of the votyak village is growing. In the beginning, this village was very negative about women's participation in social work. The first fighters for the conquest of the rights of the Votyachki, for changing the old family traditions were, in most cases, Red Army women, widows and poor elements. But this involved only a part of the women; the bulk, middle peasants, did not take part in it at first. They were distrustful of such news and, shaking their heads, said: "The soldiers have nothing to do, let them talk, but we have no time: we have a husband and a household." Thus, the composition of the delegate meeting of the Votsk region for some time could not yet cover all strata of the population. But the work on attracting middle peasants to the number of delegates, on promoting them to public work, more than a year ago was recognized as another, and at present the composition of the delegate corps is moving along the path of including representatives of all groups of the working Votyachka. Now half of all delegates are Votyachki, and most of them are poor, widows and Red Army women. Every 50 adult female peasant women have their own delegate, who, as far as she can, tries to gain knowledge in order to work in her cell. Until now, the work on the mass promotion of votachek-del Gatok could not develop widely enough. Elimination of illiteracy among delegates lies in most cases on the responsibility of teachers. It should be noted that, despite their workload, they do everything in their power here. When, in July 1926, courses for retraining women organizers were created, it turned out that they would have to talk with them not only about methods of working among women, but also teach them the simplest things first. However, thanks to the exceptional work, the training was successful ', and after its completion most of them were used at work as volga-organizers and in mass work. Compared with the same rates of 1925, which turned out to be even weaker, there was a significant improvement. At the beginning, work among female votyachki was not quite the right path. As a result of the national uplift, which at the beginning of the revolution covered all national minorities, there was a desire to develop work on the widest possible scale. In the department of working women and peasant women, this desire was expressed in the desire to cover every village, every corner. But there were not enough workers, and the women's department often resorted to transferring them from point to point, so as not to completely abandon such a wide coverage. This was, of course, abnormal, and the slogan of quality is now strongly opposed to quantity. Improving grassroots political education cells and bringing them closer to the needs of women-votists, in turn, should create local centers. 'Such institutions in the village are, first of all, reading rooms, district clubs, etc. That votyachki are drawn to these cultural and educational centers is evident from the fact that the average attendance of one reading room in the Votom region is 60% to the lot of the Votyaks. Of this number, still a small part are women, noris. 2. Pioneers this is mostly due to the fact that the reading rooms still have a very weak connection with them. We need to organize women's corners, highlight special issues that are especially interesting for women, or even one day dedicated exclusively to working with women. That the votyachka herself is interested in cultural and educational work and is ready to respond to it, say, for example, the following facts: that the attendance of regional clubs in Votskaya oblast is three-quarters of a woman, or that special women's wall newspapers are organized in a number of places. Wall newspapers are a fact that cannot be ignored. It is no secret to anyone that although more literature was published in the Votyak language during the years of the revolution than in all the time before the revolution, it is still a rarity in the Votyak village; there is almost no literature on the women's question. After the activities of the departments of working women and peasant women, it cannot confine itself to a purely women's issue and must seize that area that needs an early conquest. We want to talk about the upbringing of young people, in particular girls, about the fight against traditional "gatherings", sexual promiscuity, etc. The work to destroy these deeply rooted customs, so destructive to the health of young people and the life of the entire village, is a priority. Votyachki are so accustomed to spending their youth in such conditions that it is impossible to snatch them out of them by only one campaign or other events, without replacing the "gatherings" with something else. The reading room cannot yet replace them. You need something that connects, entertainment with useful. The experience of several years of work has convinced of the need for just such a path; The work on getting rid of the “gatherings” goes in two ways: “theoretical” and “practical”. The first part consists of purely propaganda work, which consists in clarifying the harmful consequences of traditional "get-togethers" and other similar customs. The second part — practical — consists in organizing "red gatherings", schools of cutting and sewing, arranging question and answer evenings, performances, etc. for girls. In this regard, most of the work lies with the lower-level Komsomol organizations, which have already shown themselves enough in the fight against gatherings. ' For the organization of schools of cutting and sewing, funds and premises are required, unfortunately, not always available. Therefore, this work is not developing as quickly as we would like. Work on the protection of mothers and infants, on hygiene and sanitation is carried out by district doctors through lectures and discussions. They cannot, of course, give her a lot of time, given the workload that is the constant companion of health workers in the village. Work can only give results when it is uninterrupted and persistent. Such work should be carried out by commissions for the protection of mothers and infants, recently organized at the executive committees. Already in the summer of 1926, these commissions took part in the nursery campaign. In the same way, work is being done on the ground to organize the "mother and child" corners. To snatch a child from the very first days from the oppressive environment that cripples his body is the task of these undertakings. It is necessary to force the votyach-mother to think about these questions and to do everything possible to change the conditions in which the child grew up and continues to grow. We have already seen how a child is treated with native medicine. But at present, the votyachka is beginning to understand the usefulness of work on the protection of mothers and infants and she herself takes an active part in it. The general attitude of the female masses to this work is benevolent, and its growth occurs, albeit gradually, but organically and with the active support of the women themselves. The appeal of women to village women and healers and the treatment of all kinds of diseases at home occurs not only due to the general superstition, but also due to the fact that before, except for midwives and healers, there was no one in the village. During childbirth, no one could help the votyachka. There were few hospitals, and midwives did not show up in the village. Only after the revolution a series of improvements began, expressed in the continuous expansion of the network of health care institutions serving the countryside. Already in 1925, the first graduation of sisters of mercy from a two-year school was produced in Izhevsk. “The composition of its listeners is 20% of Votyak nationality. But this is not enough. And now the health department comes to the idea of ​​the need to open an obstetric technical school in the fall of 1925, in which the majority of the students should be voted. This puts work on the path of directly serving the needs of the votyak village, through the training of workers from among the votyaks themselves. The matter of health care and the protection of mothers and infancy, like the matter of education, thus becomes the business of the votys themselves. I must also say about the consulting work that is gradually covering the Votyak village. The village needs advice, and it’s difficult to follow them to the provincial or district town where these consultations exist. they operate as special institutions. The allocation of consulting days and hours at medical plots in the countryside meets her here halfway in this need. “The work on the organization of children's institutions, which until now, for the most part, served the urban population, is proceeding more slowly. Lack of funds prevented the deepening of the work. In this regard, the center rendered substantial assistance to Votom region. Not so long ago, the Council of People's Commissars, at the request of the Women's Department of the Central Committee and the local women's department, allocated a huge sum in terms of the budget to organize a children's town in the region — 80,000 rubles. This, undoubtedly, will make it possible in the very near future to include the children of the Votyak village, who need it most of all, in work. The work of education is developing well. Votyachka studies very willingly; there are times when she comes to a health center, or to school with a child in her arms. For the first time, the question of enlightening the Votyak was raised in 1920, at the 1st All-Russian Congress of Votyak Communists. After the revolution, the Votyachka flooded into the school, which was previously almost inaccessible to her, and soon we see Votyachka not only in primary schools, but also in the second stage, even in universities. In terms of the number of Votyaks studying in universities, women often overtake men, as they studied at the time when they were fighting at the front. And at present, the number of Votya girls studying in various educational institutions is increasing all the time, and in comparison with the pre-war period is an unprecedented phenomenon. With regard to education, the Votyak girl is the foremost. She teaches in first-degree schools, studies in communist schools, and at least 40-50 votyachki are currently sent to various higher educational institutions every year. Votyachka quickly masters with participation in public work and not only becomes an active member of village meetings, which was not the case before the revolution, not only elects to bodies of public self-government, but also works in them. The figures of 1926 tell us that at the present time a third of the voters in the Votsk region are women. Involving her in cooperation and agricultural. unification is proceeding just as well. This speaks for the fact that a woman-voted woman knows how, being elected to responsible positions, to justify the trust placed in her and gets used to this new job for her. We see women-narrators, women acting as defenders on domestic and women's issues, etc., etc. It is especially necessary to note the growth of women's activity in the election of councils and the continuous growth of women in the village council and other organizations. All this shows that the departments for work among female workers and peasant women have done significant work and have completed their first campaign period. This work gave good results. She involved the woman in active social construction, in study, in work on the protection of mothers and infants and in a number of party and Soviet organizations. Not only that, agitation has already partly paved the way for the destruction of the basic abnormalities of the Votyak village. This work, of course, could not yet acquire any systematic and planned character. The task of future work is the transition from agitational influence to in-depth educational work, to a greater coordination of the activities of the lower apparatuses with social-party and Soviet work. The fight against the everyday life of the Votyak village puts on the agenda several of the most pressing issues, the solution of which is a matter of today, for example, the elimination of gatherings through practical cultural and educational activities. The progressing economic development of the region provides a basis for further work. The guarantee that the work on the implementation of these measures will be successful is everything that has been done so far. Every worker who has devoted the years of the revolution to hard work among women-votyachki can boldly look at the Path traveled by THEM, for MUCH OF WHAT could be done is done. Genuine involvement of the masses themselves in serious and creative work, taking into account all national and domestic features is a characteristic feature of our national policy. On the example of Votobraz it is especially clear. Let us give figures characterizing the achievements obtained in the work among the votyachki. Delegate corps convocation of 1925/26. The total number of delegates in Votom region is 3.470. Of this number, 2,556 peasant women. By nationality, Russians — 1,160, votyachkas — 1,556, other nationalities — 256, without specifying nationality — 37. Thus, already in 1925-26, votyachki constituted about 50%; the entire delegate corps. By party membership: VKP (b) —48, Komsomol — 137, non-party — 3.285. Courses for the training and retraining of women organizers were held 2 times — in 1925 and 1926. The first ones did not give great results in the use of female students in practical work. Courses in 4926 passed: much more successful. There were 21 people on them (votyachek — 13, Russian — 7, and Tartars — 1). Those who graduated from the courses were distributed as follows: 10 — for work as volzhen organizers, 1 — ra'ayzhen-organizer, 43 — for mass work on a county scale, 3 — for mass work and 2 — for further learning. A woman in partii and Soviet work, cooperation, etc. A woman in village councils: 1921-1922, -1 , 1925 164, 1926 579, in 1925 - 42. Women-voters to the total number of voters in 1925 - 25.3% and in 1926 - 31o / o. There are 175 women in the committees of peasant public mutual assistance. People's assessors in 1925 — 364. 3.212 h. (21.40 / o out of the total number of the cooperated population) and in the agricultural sector. cooperatives — 541, or 7o / o of the total. In elective organizations (cooperative) —25 f. We do not have figures showing the distribution of these women by nationality, but we must assume that votyachki make up a significant percentage of this number. So, for example, in committees of peasant mutual assistance of 175 women, -55 votyachki and in cooperative organizations in elective positions of 25 women-3 votyachki. There are 500 women in the party organization, out of a total of 3,287 members, of which 50 are votyachkas. Education. In the Votom region there are schools of the 1st stage — 452 (in them there are women teachers of votyachkas — 46) and the 2nd stage — 12 9- In the communist schools of the total number of students, 15% are girls (37 people). In 1925, Russian girls were sent to universities 89_, votyachek — '41, and other nationalities — 6 (21% of the total number of people on business trips). Men and women are trained jointly at the training camp for illiterate people. ' Illiteracy — 78% of Russians, Votyachki — up to 90%, and other nationalities — 88%. Izb-reading room - 89. The attendance of the 1st reading room in July-December 1925 was 337 people, of which Votyaks — 225, Russians — 142, other nationalities — 10 (clubs — 18, and 76% of them were attended by women). There are 447 women in polytechnic schools. There is no information about the distribution of female students by nationality and their attitude towards men, but there are interesting figures for 1920, which say that in the I stage of all students, more than 35% of the students, at the second stage of Yuo / o, in courses 65% ', in pedagogical institutes 96%, and 99% in the university. The high percentage for universities was explained by the fact that during this period almost all men were engaged in military service in Krasnogorsk. But the ratio in grade I schools seems to be normal. Protection of motherhood and infancy. Institutions of Okhmatmlad in Votoblast: 1% of the nursery - factory in the regional city (60 beds); in the summer of 1924. worked in rural areas 5 crèches, 1925 - 7 crèches; a mother and child home in the regional city (40 beds); orphanage - (35 beds); in county towns — a children's home - (35 beds) and a nursing home for 15 beds. There is a consultation for children, in addition to the provincial town, and in rural areas. Consultation for pregnant women in the provincial town. On the spot, in treatment centers, special consultation days are allocated. In the regional city there are 2 maternity hospitals (50 beds), in the county towns there are 25 maternity beds. Midwives in the regional city 17. There is an obstetric technical school (formerly a 2-year school for nurses) to train midwives. Graduates are mainly sent to work in the countryside. Women in need of legal advice receive free legal advice from the collegiums of defense. In the city of Izhevsk, the council of social assistance is deploying. As already mentioned, a great deal of cultural work is being carried out along the line of the okhmatmlad. These figures, of course, are approximate and incomplete and only partially allow judging the work.