4. Kalmyk woman after the revolution
The Kalmyk woman, thanks to the cultural backwardness of her people, formed under the influence of the cattle-breeding economy, the age-old exploitation of the landowners-noyons, zaisayags and the clergy supporting them, is one of the most backward women in the Union. We have already got acquainted with the life and position of the Kalmyk woman before the revolution. This is; - an eternal toiler, shackled by harsh customs and traditions, a thing that was bought as a wife, kicked out when she could not give birth to a son, and beat when she was guilty. Deprived of all rights, depersonalized to the last degree, she lived a real animal life. The extremely strict conditions of family life, marriage solely by the will of the parents, complete submission to the father, then to the owner-husband and in general to the elders, belittled the Kalmyk woman and made her into a downtrodden and intimidated woman. She got used to the fact that the representatives of the clergy regulate her life, give her advice and teach her how to act in various everyday difficulties. These are the faithful guardians of the conservative! of everyday life, all their energy was directed at entangling the Kalmyk people and Kalmyk women with the nets of their ignorant and harmful activities. They have deliberately always been, and even now, remain the patrons of traditions and rituals, from which breathes barbarism and vestiges of antiquity. They still help the man in his striving to keep the woman in a powerless position. With such support, men are reluctant to change the way of life and the position of their wives. They still not only force a woman to work to her last strength, but for any disobedience or disobedience they are punished with a whip. On this occasion, the Kalmyks have a walking saying: "A man who sharpens his knife will eat meat, a woman who sharpens her tongue sees a whip." In a remote, remote steppe, a Kalmyk lived, or rather vegetated, deprived of any opportunity not only to change, but even to improve her position. Of course, many women understood the horror of their situation, but what could they do? As a general rule, a Kalmyk woman never learned to read and write. Before the revolution, Kalmyks in general were afraid to send their children to school, fearing that if a child studied, they would put a cross on him, he would be baptized and leave the steppe. And there was no point in teaching girls at all. Teach, they say, do not teach — he will get married anyway, a stranger will be! This is how the parents reasoned. As a result, it was as difficult to meet a competent Kalmyk woman as a Kalmyk who did not know how to ride a horse. The first decisive battle to the old way of life, stubbornly supported by the population, was given on the issue of wearing the so-called. kam ^ ash: The fact is that the Kalmyk women have established a custom for a long time, according to which large breasts are considered a special shame for a girl. To avoid large breasts, a Kalmyk girl from an early age must wear a camisole — a narrow vest that tightly fits her chest and prevents the development of the chest. Needless to say, a Kalmyk woman is terribly disfigured thanks to the camisole. In addition to stopping the growth of the chest, the chest does not develop at all. And this circumstance leads to the fact that almost always the first child dies, because the mother does not have milk. The frequent illness of the Kalmyk woman also occurs due to the camisole. In order to put an end to this ugly legacy of a dark past, in order to forever rid a woman of this barbaric custom, the Kalmyk Central Executive Committee on April 20, 1921 issued a decree prohibiting all women and children from wearing camisoles. Here are the main articles of this law: “Wearing a camisole, which is rooted in the Kalmyk region, is not caused by any reasonable grounds and religious beliefs, brings innumerable disasters to the growing population. Stopping the growth of the whole body, the development of lungs, mammary glands, the camisole is the cause of illness (tuberculosis - • consumption) and mortality of children born to mothers who wore a camisole. region on April 12, 1921 decided: Art. 1. On the entire territory of the autonomous region of the Kalmyk people, to forever prohibit the wearing of a camisole, its storage and production. Art. 2. From the day of the promulgation of this decree, all persons wearing a camisole must take it off and rip it open. Art. 3. The local judge shall have the right to examine, through medical personnel and attesting witnesses, women, all suspected of wearing a camisole. Note. For lack or absence of medical personnel, the judge may invite a local teacher or other female official. 7. Punitive measures against violators of this decree are applied by judges starting from August 1, 1921, Art. 8. Local women's departments have the following responsibilities to enforce this decree: To inform local judges of all cases of violation of the decree. 1) The right to appeal against judgments made on the basis of this decree. 2) Petition the Regional Executive Committee for the issuance of special prizes for propaganda and agitation against the camisole among the population. This first word flew throughout the Kalmyk steppe about a revolution about a woman. Some joyfully, others with tears and lamentations, some voluntarily, others out of fear of judgment and punishment, had to rip up their children’s jackets and thus give them the opportunity to grow and develop normally. It is even difficult to say what enormous political and educational significance this decisive and timely defense of the Kalmyk woman had. Since that time, all women have learned that they have a loyal ally and defender of their rights. And (they received rights unheard of and completely unfamiliar to them. A special order of the Kalmyk government prohibiting the kidnapping of girls and forcibly turning them into wives, a new law on marriage, divorce, and finally, attracting a woman to participate in the construction of a new way of life for her people - did not remain for the Kalmyk woman Organizations created specifically for working among women have energetically taken up the implementation of all these decrees that radically change the life and position of a Kalmyk woman. In order to approach the female mass and embrace all women scattered over the vast expanse of the Kalmyk steppe, it was necessary to create a special organization of the most developed women-activists, the so-called women's delegate corps.By 1927, there were already up to 800 delegates throughout the region — these were the first conductors of culture to the female environment. True, 92% of them are still illiterate, they themselves need in help and education, but they represent a reliable core of those who decided to fight the old way of life and slavery The revolutionary power now boldly rests on it. One of the first tasks is to teach women to read and write. And here I had to face the common Kalmyk misfortune, the misfortune of a small, oppressed people for centuries. The old regime pursued a policy of depersonalizing nationalities, or, as they called it, foreigners. The Kalmyks were not allowed to have their own schools, newspapers and literature. As a result, the people do not have a definitively developed writing system, there is no unified grammar of the Kalmyk language, there is no dictionary, and there are no teaching aids. And only at the present time work is underway to develop a unified Kalmyk grammar and writing system, interesting experiments are being done to replace the extremely complex Kalmyk writing with the letters of the Russian alphabet. Of course, under such conditions, despite the presence of 58 educational centers in the region, it is extremely difficult to teach delegates to read and write. The difficulty is further increased by the fact that the instructors-liquidators of illiteracy are 80% Russian; at best they can teach a Kalmyk woman Russian, not Kalmyk, literacy. Under such conditions, all work with delegates is carried out exclusively through reports and conversations. A well-known test of the activity of delegates and, in general, of mass work among women is the re-election to the soviets. If we take into account the above-mentioned difficulties of work among women in general and the difficulties of preparing delegates, then we will have to admit that the results achieved in the election campaign are extremely good. Thus, throughout the region, 8,800 women turned up for re-election to the councils, that is, 26% in relation to all those who appeared for the re-election or 25% in relation to all eligible women. |; Elected to the councils 418 or 16.1%, of which AIK'e - 14, OIK'e - 3. It should be noted here that elective women do not carry out much practical work in AIK. This will become clear if we take into account that at 83/0 the elected are illiterate, and besides, there is no comradely assistance from the AIK chairmen. Quite often the chairpersons do not even give any instructions to elected women. And, nevertheless, despite this, the attendance of AIK's meetings, even in the nomadic period, when council members often live several tens of miles from the AIK's headquarters, always amounts to 85-90%. There are already women promoted: the assistant prosecutor, the member of the court, the president, the union, the head. Oblono, head. Okhmatimlad and others. The number of women in trade unions is 1.739; jurors in 1927-500; members of the party and candidates, in 1927-76 (of whom 17 were members of the party). There are 770 girls in the Komsomol (or 21.8% in relation to the entire organization of the Komsomol of the Kalmo region, moreover during the period; from January 1 to) April 1, 1927 52 girls were admitted to the Komsomol, which is 23.3% in relation to all those admitted. During this period, special cells of the Komsomol of girls have not yet been organized in the Komsomol, although there is a decree on this by the Regional Congress of the Komsomol. There are several industries in the Kalmo region, which employ up to 1,500 workers, of which 872 are female workers. The fishery does not work all year round, but only in spring and autumn, on the sea. Spring fishing usually takes place in late March, April, May and early June; autumn fishing season — September, October and November; female workers for Putin's time are recruited partly from the surrounding area, but most of all they come from the upper Volga. Only three years ago the Kalmyks began to work in the fields, their number is growing every year. In the spring fishing season, there were 195 Kalmyk women for every 872 women workers, that is, 25.5% of all women workers. Great job among; Kalmyk women are carried out by the 0001-th commission for improving the life and work of women. She conducts ulus and aimak conferences women. She also equipped and opened a dairy Kitchen for children at the Kalm-Bazarin children's consultation, organized a school; cutting and sewing in Kalm-Bazar) with a number of students of 30 people, regional and ulus legal consultations are held. On the initiative of the commission, in 1926, women's vegetable garden artels began to be organized. This year there are already 16 of them with a total number of 236 members. The main task of the garden artel is to teach a Kalmyk woman to profit from the land and at the expense of the land to improve the nutrition of her family. Of course, at first there are many shortcomings and extremely serious; such a big deal as the creation of women's artels. In the Manych ulus, for example, these artels are under the direct supervision of the commissions for the improvement of labor and life. Such leadership in such a lively business fetters the initiative of the members of the artels, which, of course, is reflected in the most deplorable way in the results of the work. The downside is that in these artels, where the most advanced women are gathered, educational work is poorly organized. There is no doubt that the task of creating all kinds of artels out of women, and primarily gardening artels, is very important and requires great help from Soviet institutions, mutual assistance committees, cooperative and other Organizations. The gardeners must be allocated convenient plots of land, organize plowing, supply the artels with implements, seeds, etc. From the successful fulfillment of all these questions; overestimate not only the well-being of a given artel, but, in general, the whole matter of raising the well-being and culture of a woman, and, consequently, of the entire Kalmyk people. The experiment of the Bazarin ulus in organizing a “seamstress” of unemployed women was very successful. On March 8, 1927, at the initiative of the Regional Zhenotdel, a school of cutting and sewing of regional significance was opened here. After the end of the course, it is planned to organize a workshop for accepting various kinds of orders. In another place, in Bagutovsky - aimake, Yandy-ko-Mochazhnogo-ulus, Kalmyk women organized themselves into an artel to make cheese from milk, or, rather, "panera". This work, at first, was difficult, since they did not immediately get down to business and there were many obstacles that hindered the development of this work, for example, the lack of milk machines and the inability to make dairy products well. Most Kalmyks live in several families in the so-called. hot-nah. In this situation, such institutions as a hospital, a club, a reading room, of course, cannot cover the entire population of the steppe.Taking into account this circumstance, the Regional Women's Department for the fullest possible coverage and involvement of Kalmyk women in Soviet construction, in the work of changing life , -organized red mobile wagons, which should work in the most backward nomadic areas. Each wagon has a paramedic-midwife with a complete set of all supplies for childbirth and! to provide emergency medical care to a working woman. Needless to say, this is already a circumstance. brought extraordinary benefits to the nomad. The fact is that, according to Kalmyk traditions, a wife must give birth under the roof of her husband. That is why it is extremely difficult for a Kalmyk woman to persuade her to go to the hospital's maternity ward. She prefers to stay at home and use the services of dubious home-grown professionals, old women and other attendants. The results, as we already know, were disastrous. Most newborns, and often the mothers themselves, will die. Now the picture is changing.! The midwife is at hand and is always ready to help the woman in labor in her kibitka. The Kalmyk family is completely malnourished, mainly because the Kalmyk woman does not know how to use milk. every Kalmyk farm has dairy cattle and enough milk, from one of the main tasks of the kibitka is to teach Kalmyk women to process milk and use this precious product to improve family nutrition. Therefore, each red wagon has a separator with a Churn. Dairy checkpoints have been organized at the kibitka, where each Kalmyk woman can process milk into cream and butter completely free of charge. Thus, dairy products, which are now completely disappearing, begin to bring income to the Kalmyk family. Red Mibitka is also building educational work around these economic undertakings. At the kibitka, a delegate group is organized, which works, according to the general program of the delegate meeting, a circle for the elimination of illiteracy, if possible, a circle for the illiterate, a circle for sanitation and hygiene. In the red kibitka (a cell of the Komsomol of girls is being organized. Much work is expected, in the future, to be deployed in the red kibitka to protect mother and child, for which exhibitions of children's and women's clothing, sets of demonstrative dishes were arranged in the kibitkas. 7 red wagons. At the head of these wagons were exclusively Kalmyk women who received special training. Unfortunately, this year, obstetric care could not expand as widely as this "It was assumed that due to the lack of medical staff. 5 wagons worked without medical workers, although there were funds to pay for them. This is explained by the fact that the Kalmo region is generally poor in both nursing staff and higher staff. From Astrakhan, paramedics-midwives do not go to work in the steppe, and midwives from the indigenous nationality for now; For the first Experiment, a two-week plan was established for the work of the wagon, why it was decided not to create any circles, educational programs, groups of delegates at the wagons, but to limit themselves only to conversations, with the help of an exhibition of protecting mother and baby, exhibitions of dishes, clothes, etc. A survey of two red wagons (Manych and Ikitsikhura) carried out by the Regional Department showed that these red wagons attracted the attention of the Population. In the Manychskiy ulus, at one of the parking lots, the Kalmyk women were so impressed by the separator and the churn that they decided to buy a car in a stack; and in order to have someone to work with her, two girls were assigned to the yase, who were obliged to learn how to work with a separator. As a result of the work of the red wagons, it became cleaner in the wagons, the Kalmyk women began to wash the dishes, bathe degas, and so on. character, along with an insulting oversight of the technical order, expressed at least in the fact that the wagons were equipped with magic lanterns "huts", the managers were not taught how to handle them, why the lanterns were inactive, it is necessary to note the fact that the two-week parking kibitki on one! the location was completely inadequate. The kibitki did not have time to unfold their work, the Kalmyk women did not have time to swing [to go and see Even the kibitka, let alone to usefully learn all that | the new thing that the wagon brought to the steppe, how it had to roll up and move to another two-week camp. Of course, all the rough work of the red wagons will be taken into account! and next year they, increased in number and better equipped, will greatly benefit the Kalmyk woman. Created by a caring hand, the red wagons will soon become real conductors of the liberation of the Kalmyk woman from the old way of life. In conclusion, we note that the Kalmyk people, having passed the hard way of the Russian tsarism, enmity with other nationalities, overcoming the difficulties after the revolution | demarcation from the surrounding regions and peoples, boldly embarked on a systematic internal construction. Only now, having firmly established themselves on their land, the Kalmyk people got the opportunity to start improving their economic situation, raising their culture and changing the whole way of their hard life. And no matter how difficult the tasks facing him are, he will fulfill them completely. And then the Kalmyk woman will take her rightful place not only in the family, but also in the entire working and state life of her people.