3. Work among Chuvash women during the years of the revolution
Chuvash women have been working for a few years. It could begin in a planned way only after the civil war and famine, in connection with the general economic construction. The most difficult thing was to start it in an atmosphere of economic and cultural backwardness and continue without interruption. There was a shortage of women workers. At the same time, it was necessary from among the Chuvash themselves to put forward some asset capable of doing work. The Chuvashka, hitherto completely removed from public life, had to be involved in both party and Soviet work. Opportunities for such a broad work were not always on the face, but with the general economic, political and cultural growth of the young republic, its base is becoming more and more stable. Soon after the October Revolution, the awakening of the Chuvashka peasant woman begins. She begins to realize her position, tries to look at her surroundings with different eyes. Natural disasters, especially hunger, have stirred up women, who, along with men, jointly fought against these disasters. At the same time, the age-old isolation of the Chuvash people was destroyed — for the first time a hand of fraternal help was extended to him. This assistance was provided by the Russian proletariat. We will cite here a story about one Chuvash social activist, whose work is indicative of the awakening of the women of Chuvashia, which began after the October Revolution 1) “Our downtrodden, illiterate, sold and bought for kalym“ appayka ”—and she is already striving for Soviet social work ... Here in front of me lies a voluminous calendar in the Chuvash language for 1923; Turning through it, I suddenly come across a photograph depicting one of our village “appay” sitting next to Klara Zetkin, with Zetkin's shoulders wrapped in a veil of a Chuvash woman painted with national patterns. The Chuvash text under the photo tells the following: the figure shows a peasant woman from the village of Sinial (New Village), an illiterate, non-party Spani. This woman was the organizer and leader of a female labor artel for knitting and embroidery in ') The story is borrowed from Petrov's book "Chuvashia", 1926, a hungry year. This artel, with the help of Moscow, which supplied it with materials, expanded its production quite widely and made it possible for its members and their children to escape from starvation. At the end of the famine in the fall of 1922, during the October celebrations, this S'pani arrived in Moscow, to thank the Moscow proletariat for the assistance rendered to them by the Chuvash population throughout the famine year. The calendar indicates that Spani is not alone and is not an exception among the Chuvash, and that the revolution gradually involves an enslaved Chuvash woman in public work. ”Such a difficult time for Chuvashia brought forward a number of women social activists who did significant work. In a time of hunger, a number of artels were organized, which put forward, at least in small numbers, some asset from among the Chuvash themselves. If in the years of famine they united only with the aim of fighting it, then later, along with the economic and cultural upsurge of the republic, a number of new tasks were set. The Soviet government freed the Chuvash woman, along with all oppressed women, from the yoke of age-old prejudices, and gave her legal rights equal to that of men. The woman became a full member of the family, the owner of the rightfully owned part of the property; finally, she can decide all public affairs on an equal basis with men. But, in order to fully implement these achievements in real life, it was necessary to involve the Chuvash in the work of party and Soviet institutions. In the situation of the Chuvash countryside with its economic and domestic backwardness, this task is very difficult. “It is sometimes difficult for an ordinary peasant Chuvashin to come to terms with the idea of ​​a woman's right to equal participation in public life with him. In this respect, educators are the most sympathetic to the equality of women, apart from party members. Thanks to these circumstances, women still make up a very small percentage in the ranks of the party. A meeting of heads of women's departments, instructors and organizers among women of the Chuv Republic, which took place in January 1926, once again resolutely put forward the slogan of involving a Chuvash peasant woman — “a peasant woman from a spinning wheel” —in the party. There is no doubt that in the near future the results of this work will continuously increase. Great results are obtained by attracting Chuvash women to the Komsomol. In the atmosphere of Chuvash life, the Komsomol acquires great importance. No wonder they call him "the creator of the future." He has to bear on his shoulders the struggle against the economic and especially cultural backwardness of the Chuvash countryside. ‘The overwhelming majority of the cultural workers in the countryside are members of the Komsomol. It must be said in this connection about one of the difficulties of developing work in the countryside. The fact is that the population of Chuvrespu bliki is scattered over small villages with a population of 400-500 people. This often inevitably leads to the dispersion of cultural forces, which are already very few in the republic. Therefore, the growth of grassroots party and Komsomol cells, and the creation of local cultural centers around them, allows not only to expand the work, but also to conduct it in more depth, capturing the most abandoned and remote corners. Chuvashka is also gradually involved in this work. The number of Chuvash women in the party is growing (in 1925 - 3% with a small number of the total number of party members, in 1926 more than 4%). The total number of women (including non-Chuvash women) in the Chuvash party reached 10% of the total membership in 1926, and 13% in the Komsomol. It should be noted the growing number of pioneers (26% of the total). This speaks for the fact that the Chuvashka girl breaks out of the environment of the old way of life in which she hitherto grew up. The participation of the Chuvashka in delegate meetings, which are her first school, gives significant success. The numerical growth of female delegates (7,048 people in 1926, of which 6,675 are in the villages; says that the mass of peasants is more and more covered, and an increasing number of women are involved in public, collective life. The qualitative growth of the delegates' meeting does not always keep pace with the quantitative one, but continuous and energetic work is being done in this direction. The elimination of political and general illiteracy among the delegates themselves has already yielded significant results and continues as before at an unrelenting pace. Workers among women have already realized that the pursuit of quantity can often produce negative results. “Better less, but better” should be the slogan here. First of all, it is necessary to destroy the idea that a woman cannot perform social work on an equal basis with a man. This is possible only if the women of the community show themselves to be good workers. In the first years of work among the Chuvash women, this pursuit of quantity affected to some extent. Its results showed up very quickly. The elections to the soviets in 1925-1926 were less favorable for the Chuvash woman than the previous ones, for the number of women elected to the soviets. This is due to the fact that in the previous elections there were few authoritative and good-working women. The weakness of the election campaign and the increased, in connection with these circumstances, the mistrustful attitude of men played an important role. From this fact, the departments of workers and peasants have made appropriate exits, which will make it impossible to repeat such cases. However, it must be said that in many respects a Chuvash woman shows herself much more actively than men and her interest in public life, participation in it, increases. so, for example, as early as 1923 in a number of villages women took an active part in the fight against moonshine, becoming the worst enemies of moonshiners. Thanks to the efforts of the Chuvash women, peasants who are members of the executive committees, a large number of moonshiners in a number of villages were detained and brought to trial. As for the participation of women in the social life of the village, from isolated cases at the beginning of work, it becomes a common occurrence. Even in a number of villages, which before the revolution were the darkest corners of Chuvashia (like, for example, Staro-Akhperdino, Tsivilsky uyezd), the presence of women at gatherings along with men has become commonplace. On the example of this village, it is generally interesting to trace the increase in the activity of a woman, her gradual liberation from the chains of the old way of life. Before the revolution, this village was one of those where women did not even visit outside their village. Many Chuvash women would hardly be able to answer the question of which road leads to the village located 15 miles from their village. It was possible to meet Chuvash women barely counting to a hundred and unable to distinguish a three-ruble note from a five-ruble one. Until recently, the mothers or wives of the Chuvash Red Army men walked 150-200 versts to Kazan; carried rusks on their shoulders to their sons or husbands; despite the fact that there was a railway. They were afraid of trains, just as they used to be afraid of everything new and therefore preferred to walk. In a word, the village was the most backward and lived according to old grandfather's customs. There could be, of course, no question of not only recognizing a woman's rights, but even of her partial independence. And in this bearish corner, a few years after the October Revolution, its own revolution began, the revolution of the Chuvash woman. One of the girls in the village married a loved one against the wishes of her parents, who wanted to give her for a richer groom. Until now, the will of the parents in the village was considered law. However, the girl managed to insist on her own and the parents were forced to yield. This set an example for other girls to shake the foundations of old traditions. Two other girls committed no less crime from the point of view of the Chuvash village. They performed on the stage of the village theater, which neither women nor girls did before, considering it shameful. This act alone served as a rich material for the indignation and gossip of village gossips. But what they did next; was perhaps an even greater violation of old customs. We have already said that the Chuvash considered education on the side to be immoral for women. And now this immorality has taken place. The girls went to study. However, as the author of the note on these events adds, the village eventually got used to this way of action. This is how the revolution of the Chuvash woman takes place. These cases are not isolated. The woman herself begins to take the path of the public. ' If at first only a few of the poor, the Red Army women and other leading single women entered this path, now the delegate corps unites several thousand peasant women. By their composition, in most cases they belong to the poor strata of the countryside; a significant number (approximately 1/3) are, and average. Thus, the class principle is carried out here, and the struggle against kulak elements is supported by well-organized women. In a number of different Soviet, professional, cooperative and other institutions and organizations, the Chuvash woman gradually takes her rightful place. The number of cooperative women reaches 11 ° / 0 in relation to the entire cooperative population. Women actively work in rural, rural municipality and canton councils. They participate in the work of committees of peasant social mutual assistance, ranging from rural and ending with the Central Committee. In a number of institutions, Chuvash women work as trainees. The promotion of women to work not only in local institutions, but also in central ones should be noted as a particularly positive fact. We already see a Chuvash in the cooperative bodies, in boards and audit commissions. The highest percentage of women in trade unions is 22%. The justice authorities, which are called upon to protect the rights of women, according to the main provisions of the Soviet regime, should also involve 4 women. This is especially true of a number of cases arising from the old way of life. Communication between the departments of female workers and peasants with institutions of justice is widely practiced. The women themselves participate in court proceedings as lay judges. The supreme body of the republic, the People's Commissariat of Justice, has 2 women as members of its collegium. It would take a long time to list all those organizations and institutions in which the work of women is becoming more and more natural. The specific data given at the end of the brochure speaks best of the size of this work. The issues of enlightenment are especially acute for a Chuvash woman. Extensive propaganda and cultural work was carried out and continues. Illiteracy among adult Chuvash women is eliminated through delegate meetings and educational centers. Work is ongoing to increase the number of girls in primary school. Of the total number of pioneers in the republic, girls make up more than 1D. But not only the lower school is won by the Chuvashka. Every year, several dozen women are sent to special and higher educational institutions, workers' schools, communist schools, etc. Now the Chuvashka herself strives for enlightenment. If she cannot get it at school, she works in a number of clubs. Thus, in many places, circles for the study of the women's movement, schools of cutting and sewing, etc. have been organized. The active workers among women also increase their training. From 15/1 to 1 / N-26, two-week republican courses for training and retraining of workers among women took place. Chuvashki made up the overwhelming majority of these courses. The courses, in addition to replenishing the knowledge of workers among women, gave the ambassador an opportunity to discuss the main issues of work, as an exchange of views between the course participants. It is quite obvious that reading rooms should devote a significant part of their attention to work among peasant women. It cannot be said that until now this has been fully realized. Only recently has attention been paid to the organization of a "peasant's corner" in the huts-reading rooms; there are also special days (one per week) dedicated exclusively to work among women. It must be said that political and educational work is greatly hampered by the lack of literature. There is especially little literature that would deal with issues related to the life of a woman. Demands for literature are heard from all corners of the Chuvrespublika. In this regard, all possibilities are used and literature, albeit in small quantities, is being published. So by March 8, 1926, brochures about the International Women's Day on March 8, about the All-Union Communist Party of Bolsheviks and work among women, about nurseries and consultations, and, finally, the play "Babi's Prize" were published in the Chuvash language. The women's issue is also given a place on the pages of periodicals. In the local newspapers Kanash and Trudovaya Gazeta there is a “woman's corner”, where materials on work among women are published 2-3 times a week. The participation of women in the press is expressed in the movement of selkoroks, the number of which has been increasing all the time. It is necessary to point out the desire of women to organize labor handicraft artels. It has already been said how in the years of famine, these artels often spontaneously grew. In most cases, the initiative for organizing them belongs to the departments of workers and peasants. The latter, in a famine year, having only 1,000 poods of grain and 100 million money (for Sovznak), managed to develop a wide network of artels (13 artels were organized in the Cheboksary district, and 14 in Tsivilsk). Chuvash women willingly go to the artels, they are hardworking, but the lack of funds does not make it possible to expand this business widely, although there is always a desire on the part of the women themselves to organize artels. With the wide spread of domestic diseases in the Chuvash village, these issues acquire great importance. The Chuvash health department says in its report: "A poorly cultured Chuvash woman, a peasant woman, is almost never served by institutions for the protection of mothers and babies." The mortality rate of infants in Chuvrespublik is 29.22% (the report refers to the beginning of 1925;. Over the past 2 years, there have been, of course, a number of improvements and significant work has been done, however, the situation is still not safe. The need for obstetric care does not give in accounting, midwives throughout the republic are considered almost units (in rural areas), Chuvashka continues, in most cases, to resort to the help of village midwives and doctors. Although there are maternity beds at hospitals, they are not enough. They can serve a small number of women giving birth (no more than 5%, since their radius of action is 17 versts) is too large with a dense population. Often a Chuvashka herself does not seek medical help. It is necessary to intensify the agitation and educational work on the protection of motherhood, in addition to the one that is constantly being carried out in order to accustom her to this. Only then will the Chuvashka understand that she is crippling herself by addressing the grandmothers and midwives. This is a spontaneous scourge of the Chuvash people, which grew out of their economic oppression, ignorance and antihygiene. Fighting it requires decisive and broad-based measures. It must be said that women are more at risk of trachoma than men, as they are engaged in more painstaking and dirty work in unhealthy conditions. 'A lot of work has already been done to combat trachoma. As early as 1922-23, medical students were sent to the Chuvash countryside, who did a lot of propaganda work; in 1923-24, 3 eye teams worked in the field, in 1924-25 two eye hospitals were added to them. The number of eye beds at medical centers in 1925 in comparison with 1921 increased three times. The health department has outlined (possibly already implemented) the organization of 5 eye hospitals in the areas most affected by trachoma, the organization of ophthalmological points with a hospital, eye surgical departments at each local hospital, and the invitation of 5 permanent eye teams. There are 2 trachomatous orphanages and a number of other institutions. In the fight against trachoma, propaganda work is very important, which should explain under what conditions trachoma flourishes. This work primarily concerns women, it teaches them to educate their children, protecting them, if possible, from antihygienic conditions. A number of other diseases (typhus, malaria, tuberculosis; they are also quite common in the Chuvash village and an equally vigorous struggle is being waged against them. lectures, sanitary courts, special films are shown, etc.Tasks and goals of protection of mothers and infants. are explained to the population in special editions and lectures. A consultation on these issues has been introduced. In addition to the houses of mothers and children, orphanages and similar institutions existing in a number of places, a nursery is of great importance. Unlike some regions, where the population has not yet fully realized the full benefits of this undertaking, the Chuvash, especially women, willingly go to meet them. They not only recognize the usefulness of the nursery, but also provide them with all possible material assistance. Thanks to this, the number of creches increases from year to year (sic) from 1924 to 1925. their number has quadrupled). In addition to temporary creches in years. Cheboksary and Tsivilsk are permanent. In addition, there is a connection between women and children's institutions; the protection of motherhood and infancy becomes close to the Chuvash. In an environment of economic backwardness, material assistance provided to women through the departments of female workers and peasant women is of great importance. It consists in the free supply of firewood and other essentials to the most needy. The Selkor movement growing among the women of Chuvashia promises us that the life of the Chuvash people and their needs will be covered by them themselves, and they will often tell us about the difficulties in work that should be overcome joint efforts, as well as about their victories and achievements. In conclusion, we note that the Chuvash community is showing great interest in working among women. This is evidenced at least by the fact that the first picture released recently 'Chuvash-cinema "Sar-Pige" (woman) is dedicated to the emancipation of the Chuvash woman from the age-old shackles of slavery. Work among the Chuvash women living outside the Chuvres public (Bashrespublika, Ulyanovsk, lips. , Samara Gubernia and Tatrespublika) follows the same paths, although somewhat more slowly, due to the scattered Chuvash population and a number of other conditions. However, a number of achievements are evident here as well. The main one is the more and more awakening activity of the Chuvash themselves. So in the Birsk canton the Chuvash organized a 13-person vegetable gardening artel "Zarya", and with the proceeds from the sale of vegetables, they entered into cooperation. There are many such cases. Chuvashki are interested in practical endeavors. They themselves want to actively participate in Soviet construction. And they participate: for example, in one locality of the Bashkortostan Republic, a Chuvashka-Komsomol member is the chairman of the village council and, thanks to his work, enjoys enormous popularity. In the Ulyanovsk province. there were cases of women staging performances in the Chuvash language, etc. The desire for a collective farm (vegetable gardens, the purchase of separators, weaving machines, etc.). active participation in public life and co-construction is also characteristic of a Chuvash woman living outside the republic. The story of one of the workers among Chuvash women, Vasilisa Pavlova, clearly speaks of the huge path that the Chuvash traveled under the soviet power. As a child, she wanted to study, but her parents said: "Where do you go to study, you still won't be a priest." Then she told how, after the revolution, the young woman “found out the essence of Soviet power” and began to study. “After graduating from the same party school, Fig. 2. Women's asset of Chuvashia. Began to work among our backward Chuvash women. It was very difficult to accustom them to meetings, because we only have 7 literate people out of a hundred, but still I manage to do something. With complaints they now go to the volunteer organizer, they have to appear in court in defense of the peasant women. In the past!) This figure refers only to the area referred to in the story. The general literacy among the Chuvash is higher. year there were "8 peasant women in the soviets, and this year (1926) there are 13 of them and they work on an equal footing with the peasants. Participate in cooperatives and in the committee for mutual assistance. the widow and squeezed her one and a half corrals of rye. The Chuvash peasant women understood the benefits of the pioneer detachments and enlisted the guys as pioneers. In my volost there are 6 pioneer detachments, in which there are about 150 people. " in the Chuvash village and in the life of a Chuvash woman, in particular. ”Local workers are very modest about the results of their work.Comrade Pavlova writes that “we managed to do something,” but this “something” is very large; Deploying its work at a time when famine, epidemics, almost complete collapse of the economy squeezed a small republic in a tight circle, the Chuvash women's department found the courage to openly look danger in the eyes. In this 1921 year, in one of its reports, the women's department cited a phrase that must not be forgotten: “We are faced with a terrible task: to educate this dying woman, educate her politically, and we undertake this.” Only less than six years have passed, and this task is honorable fulfilled by many percent. And if there are even greater difficulties ahead, is it possible to doubt overcoming them if you get acquainted with all your previous work? Of course not, and you just need to deepen and expand the work already in progress. There is a good start and a solid foundation for this.

4. Materials about work among Chuvash women
1. The composition of the delegate corps: (according to the data of the beginning of 1926). Total delegates - 7.967, delegate meetings - 79. The overwhelming percentage of them are in the countryside (over 90%). There are no exact figures, just like there are no exact figures for the distribution by nationality. Chuvash constitute the majority, so, for example, out of 3.014 delegates of the Cheboksary u. — Chuvash — 2.294. Workers employed in the governing bodies of the department of workers and peasants in the Chuvrespublika are mostly Chuvash. An idea of ​​the social composition of the delegate corps can be drawn from the figures of the Batyrev district, where 1.052 delegates are distributed approximately: 6О ° / o T poor people and widows, 35 ° / 0 middle peasants, 5% of women employees and teachers. The size of the work is indicated by the figures for 3 months 192o (January-March throughout the Chuvrespublika). During this time, delegate meetings were held in the city — 50, there were 2,096 women, citywide — 7, there were 380 women, 56 trade union meetings (in the city), there were 131 women and 7 district meetings in the city, 138 people were present. In the village — volost delegate meetings — 85, attended by 6.345, rural — 437, attended — 10.761. Average attendance at delegate meetings is over 50 ° / o. The total literacy rate among the entire female population of the republic is about 10%. How successful is the elimination of illiteracy among women delegates can be seen from the figures from the survey of women's departments from 26 / III-25 to 8 / 1-26. 200 women, and by the time of the survey 267 women were studying again, Yadrinsky district eliminated the illiteracy of 1.271 women. In total, in 4 counties for the year (19257 illiteracy of 2,087 women was eliminated. B 192 / year from 1 / U1 to 20 / YSh, courses were held in Moscow for the training of women workers among the nationals, where there were 22.2 Chuvash women. in the party, the Komsomol and the pioneer movement According to the center, as of 1/1-1925, there are 1,300 communists in Chuvrespublika, of whom 96 are women (7.4 ° / 0), Chuvashes — 42, Russians — 49, others - 5 and on 1/1 - 1926 only 2.464, women - 229 (9.3%), Chuvash - 102, Russians - 121, others - 6 (according to the Chuvash Women's Department on 1/1 - 1926 166 , 9% of the total number of party members, and on 1/1—1927 90 party members and 200 candidates). In the Komsomol there are 1.161-13% of the total number and pioneers, 2.826-26% of the total. the percentage as the age decreases — there are twice as many pioneers as the Komsomol. This activity of the younger generation is an extremely positive sign. The percentage of Chuvash women in the Komsomol and pioneer movement is probably higher than in the party. 3. Women in the Soviet, professional and operational construction. (Soviet construction — figures for 4 counties, with the exception of Cheboksary). For 1 / 1— 1926 women! members of village councils — 451, voliS-regiments — 3, district executive committees — 4, city councils — 20, candidates — 4. Cheboksary u. (July 1926): women members of village councils — 184, wikov — 3, wik — 2, revision. com. - 45, in public organizations of choice - 87, CEC - 1 member. and 1 cand. Mutual aid committees — rural KKOV-335, members of audit commissions — 252, VKKOV — 4 and members! revision. commissions — 3, UKKOV — 6 and revision. commissions — 7, TsKKOV — 3, and 2 candidates. According to the center of women, members of the village councils of 1924-25 accounted for 11% / 0 of the total number of members of the villages. and in 1925-26 — 7.9 ° / 0. Trade unions — members of the women's trade union as of April 1, 1925 — 1.716 (19.9%, out of a total of 8.621) and on 1/4 — 1926 — 3.767 (19.1 "/ o to a total of 19.683), many of them carry out work in the professional line. Cooperation — only 1,730 women are cooperated (11% of the total number of cooperatives). There are women in elective positions in cooperative institutions. L bodies of justice - members of the Nar. Com. Yust. Chuv-rep. — 2, judges — 1, Narzassedeli — 337. A number of women's appearances in courts as advocates. 4. Cultural enlightenment, the organization of artels, schools, etc. There are no rural women in Tsivilsky district — 4, in Batyrevsky — 2, Alatyrsky — 29, there is no information on other districts. Circles for the study of women's movement: Tsivilskoge u. — 7, in Batyrevsky u. — 2, in Alatyrsky u. — 6, in Cheboksary u. — 9. In Cheboksary u. there is a cutting and sewing school in the Marpo Garden. From 15 / 1 to 1 / Ш 1926 in Cheboksary, two-week republican courses for retraining workers among women of the Chechen SSR were held. There were 64 women in the course, of which 52 were Chuvash, 11 were Russian, and 1 was Tatar. Of these, party members — 1, candidates — 6, Komsomol — 19, non-party — 38; of them there were 29 delegates, members of the village council — I, members of the mutual aid committees — 6, women workers — 19, workers of the health centers — 1, heads of children — 1 and those who did not work in public organizations — 6. Lectures were delivered in Russian and Chuvash. 75% of those who attended the courses had a lower education or little literacy. Women were sent to various educational institutions in 1925 according to Tsivilsky district. in regional social and political schools of the first stage - 8; II degree — 3 women and 4 women at the workers' faculty; according to Batyrevsky u. to various educational institutions — 17 women and in Alatyr — 9 (but no information about other counties) .5. Protection of mothers and infants and health care (information 1924-25). Two homes for mothers and children (Cheboksary for 40 beds and Tsivilsk for 10 beds; a permanent type nursery: Cheboksary — 15 beds and Tsivilsk — 15 beds. In 1924 there were only 2 nurseries in the summer (in the village of Kukshuch, Yadrinsk ., for 10 beds of willow. Yal-gindine of the Cheboksary district for 20 beds, in the last 3 months 1,800 bed days have passed; In 1925 there were 3 nurseries for summer time in each county (12 nurseries in total). According to information from the beginning of 1926 In Tsivilsky uyezd 4 creches and 1 playground for children are mentioned, creches that worked in the summer time in Batyrevsky uyezd are mentioned, but their number is not indicated.In the same uyezd there are 2 orphanages. 3 crèches. Here we have 13 crèches in 3 counties. As already mentioned, there are no special maternity hospitals, but there are maternity beds at all hospitals. Fight against trachoma. The number of trachoma patients (information from the beginning of 1925): Ibresinsky per 110.000 inhabitants - 77.000-70%, Cheboksary district - 113.500-73.100-61.7%, Tsivilsky district - 173.400 - 70.100-39.3%, Yadrinsky district - 19 0.500—43.300—23% of the total of 587.400 — 263.500 patients, that is, 48.5%. In 1924, there were 63,826 eye diseases in total (of which 32,474 trachomas). Open eye offices in Cheboksary, Marposad and Ibresy. Special eye beds in Yadrin — 20, Kanash — 20, 3 trachomatous orphanages in Batyrev for 60 children and Aknosin for 58 children. Other measures (it is planned to open 5 eye hospitals and an eye surgery department at hospitals, the work of eye teams, etc.) was mentioned above. Posters and brochures have been posted to combat trachoma. The number of eye beds by 1925 was 234 (against 87 in 1921). Obviously, all these numbers should be increased for the present time, since work in all directions is vigorously developing. Even for 1925-26. they cannot cover the whole work. However, they provide excellent evidence of its significance. When writing the brochure, in addition to a number of pre-revolutionary publications, introducing the old way of life and personal observations, were used: 1. Petrova - "Chuvashia". GIZ, 1926 2. The magazine and newspaper "Life of Nationalities", a number of newspaper articles and correspondences, articles and notes in "Kommunist" and "Krestyanka" for different years. 3. Materials (reports, reports, digital data) of the Department of Workers and Peasant women of the Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party of Bolsheviks and the People's Commissar-Zdrava and other photographs belong to the Department. Slave. and Cr. Central Committee and Central Museum of Ethnology. Author.