5. Legal cultural achievements of Tajik women in the Soviet Union.
The changes in the life of a Tajik woman caused by the October Revolution, of course, do not, of course, exhaust the tasks facing the Soviet government in emancipating women from age-old slavery. Let's start with the economic conditions of existence of a Tajik woman. In this respect, if there are changes, they were expressed only in the development of some crafts and the decline of others. This phenomenon is due to the general economic disruption in the villages, as a result of the civil war and Basmachism, which is only now beginning to get rid of with the implementation of the national demarcation of Central Asia. So, for example, in the years of high prices, handicraft cotton production, which was the exclusive occupation of women, developed very much. Everywhere they began to spin, weave, dye their popular mat, and the wages of women in this craft increased. But, on the other hand, embroidery, for example, which has always flourished, has significantly decreased, since in the conditions of the economic crisis it constitutes a kind of luxury in a woman's everyday life. Perhaps, the economic changes that took place in the life of a Tajik woman shortly after the October Revolution are limited to such phenomena. We now turn to the terms of the legal order. There are many more achievements here. Soviet legislation, to be sure, to a very insignificant extent still leaked into the inaccessible mountains of Adjikistan, but a huge cultural shift is already evident. Of course, in some places there are only vague rumors that now it is no longer possible to have many wives, that in case of divorce, the husband has no right to demand ransom from his wife, but rumors! these prompts a woman to check them in difficult times: the minute she receives in this case a proper explanation and protection of all her rights. Men, especially the faithful, of course, are very hostile to all these legal and cultural undertakings among women, and therefore they are in no hurry to implement them. However, Soviet legislation has already won solid ground in Tajikistan and, above all, this applies to the field of marriage. 1) In order for a marriage relationship to have all legal rights, a marriage is registered with the executive committee, moreover, for its conclusion, a certificate of attainment of marriageable age is required. about the absence of any obstacles to marriage at all. This circumstance prompts women to inevitably use this legal order, although, of course, they meet obstacles on the way to their rights from everywhere. 2) Soviet law prohibits polygamy. In this respect, there is also a significant shift in favor of women. The number of such marriages is gradually starting to decrease. Although it is practiced, entering into another marriage, it is mainly in cities and, at the same time, this custom is already becoming obsolete in the eyes of the population and losing ground. With regard to the law on divorce, there was a case (in Shahristan) when: one woman dared to initiate a divorce case in court and achieved a decision in her favor. This incident was of tremendous importance in the eyes of the population and, above all, in the eyes of women. He showed them that the fabulous rumors about women's freedom, which shyly circulate among the inhabitants of the villages, are not fiction at all, but a living reality, and that Soviet law broadly protects a woman from her centuries-old enslavement. However, it is necessary to note the obstacles that lie in the way of a Tajik woman to the exercise of her rights. First of all, a woman is connected by the distance to courts and administrative centers, which are located mainly in cities. A woman cannot leave the house, sit on a donkey or a horse and go far into the city, bother about a personal matter. This is completely unacceptable in her own eyes and in the eyes of the entire population of the village, due to the way of life, which was mentioned above. The second obstacle is fear of public opinion. A Tajik woman who dared to seek her most vital rights, even when her position turned out to be really hopeless, still cannot count on the approval of her deed from the local residents. The same friends, constant interlocutors and sad women, even her relatives, having learned about such an act, are unable to reconcile with him and leave the "crime" of their unfortunate fellow villager without publicity and censure. Such acts are covered with shame, which for a century defiles the reputation of an honest Tajik woman in the village. The usual motives for acquiring a second and third wife, during the life of the first, * are complaints that. "She does not give birth," that "she is sick," and so on, etc. So! Thus, there are still many obstacles to the complete conquest of her rights by a Tajik woman, and they are very serious, since they lie in the peculiarities of her age-old way of life and those shortcomings of the still young Soviet apparatus, which has been built since the formation of the national republics. The elimination of the age-old ignorance, which was so favorably supported before the revolution among the Eastern peoples, will cause the only true and a crushing blow to all kinds of obstacles to the emancipation of women in the Soviet East. The question of this is one of the main issues of Sovietization of the East and a powerful factor in establishing a strong connection with the national liberation movement in the countries of the foreign East. The Soviet government applies all measures in this direction, both economic and legal, as well as those directly related to the life of a working woman. In the economic field, agriculture is supported, industrial centers are being planted, artisanal and agricultural artels are developing, which can give a woman powerful support in her aspirations for material independence, in the legal field, the laws on marriage, guardianship, and the right to work are already mentioned. , education, etc. Proven methods of mass work among Tajik women are women's clubs and delegate meetings. Both those and others serve as the best organizers of the most backward female masses and the best conductor of a new way of life. As a result of this work of the Soviet authorities in Tajikistan, there are already cases when a woman has a salary higher than her husband, even has the opportunity to make gifts on her own (which was previously observed as a rare phenomenon only in remote mountainous regions), and thereby expands her influence in the family and strengthens its material independence. The so-called dairy artels, widespread in Tajikistan, can provide good support to agricultural associations. Due to the fact that the field economy is poorly developed; Often there is not enough feed and it is difficult to collect dairy products in quantities exceeding personal consumption, Tajik women are united in dairy artels. The latter's task is to save up the necessary dairy products for the farm, such as butter, sour cream, cheese, etc. For this purpose, the members of the artel transfer all their daily milk yield to some one housewife, of course, also to a member of the artel, and the latter, having received more milk than is needed for her family's consumption, prepares from it the products necessary for her, which she can sell. Thus, a circular alternation occurs. These artels include, usually, from 5 to 15 people. In mountainous areas, there is a wide participation of Tajik women in field work and in cattle breeding. Often, women retire with their children and cattle to pastures, living there the whole summer in separate female colonies. Men, busy with their own work in the village, only rarely go to visit their families. All these customs can play an enormous role in the emancipation of the Tajik woman, no less than the centers of industry that are being planted in some places. Of course, there is no doubt that direct cultural and educational work among women remains in the first place, and in this respect there are already significant gains. 4 women's clubs were organized: 1) in Dushamba, where a new building was built for the club at the expense of the Tajik Revolutionary Committee. At the club, a children's consultation, a women's outpatient clinic and, in addition, an artel are being created. This club is gaining considerable authority in the eyes of the population, and women are already starting to go there. 2) In Ura-Tyube, a women's club was organized with the participation of women members of the CP (b) of Uzbekistan in May 1925. This club also has a women's outpatient clinic, but Fig. 3. School for the eradication of illiteracy. The premises are so crowded that it does not accommodate everyone who wants to participate in the club, schools for the eradication of illiteracy and a school for girls have been opened. 3) In Panjakent, a club was recently organized with the direct participation of representatives of the women's department of the Central Committee of the Communist Party (Bolsheviks) of Uzbekistan, both in the matter of finding premises and in material terms. 4) The club in the Pamirs was organized in the spring of 1924, now it is additionally equipped. The only literate Tajik woman in the Pamirs was recruited to work there. funds of the Tajik Revolutionary Committee. At the club, a children's consultation, a women's outpatient clinic and, in addition, an artel are being created. This club is gaining considerable authority in the eyes of the population, and women are already starting to go there. 2) In Ura-Tyube, a women's club was organized with the participation of women members of the CP (b) of Uzbekistan in May 1925. This club also has a women's outpatient clinic, but Fig. 3. School for the eradication of illiteracy. The premises are so crowded that it does not accommodate everyone who wants to participate in the club, schools for the eradication of illiteracy and a school for girls have been opened. 3) In Panjakent, a club was recently organized with the direct participation of representatives of the women's department of the Central Committee of the Communist Party (Bolsheviks) of Uzbekistan, both in the matter of finding premises and in material terms. 4) The club in the Pamirs was organized in the spring of 1924, now it is additionally equipped. The only literate Tajik woman in the Pamirs was recruited to work there. Around the clubs there is a continuous struggle: women defending their equality on the one hand and the reactionary element on the other. In the conditions of this struggle, a Tajik woman has to build her new way of life and with great difficulties approach her goal. Emancipation of women it takes other forms as well. Under the central Soviet bodies, special women's commissions have been formed that fight for women's rights and involve Tajik women in public work. The activities of these commissions are mainly aimed at labor protection. In general, the women of Tajikistan are quite successfully involved in Soviet work. In the Pamirs, at the Congress of Soviets, for example, 4 women took part, and one of them now works in the Volost Executive Committee. According to Hurray: - Up to 10 women have been elected to the councils of Tyu-bin vilayet. Primary schools for girls and women have been opened in Dushamba, Ura-Tyube, Panjakent and the Pamirs. It is absolutely necessary to apply the methods of work among women to the peculiarities of local life, for * a survey of the life of Tajik women showed that the conditions surrounding a woman in high-mountainous areas and on the plains are completely different. two years ago, immediately after the national demarcation and before them, first of all, the question arose about the methods of work. It was recognized that the best means of emancipating Tajik women should be household innovations that could directly show a woman the full fruitfulness of Soviet construction. And this point of view turned out to be absolutely correct. The work of women's departments unfolded throughout Tajikistan. In Dushamba, the head of the women's department is an experienced worker in the conditions of Uzbekistan, who speaks the Tajik language. In Panjakent, the head of the women's department is a Russian, but fluent in the Uzbek and Tajik languages, who graduated from courses to train teachers for the elimination of illiteracy. In order to expand the still small contingent of workers, in Samarkand from-Rice. 4. Abdu Azizova, a member of the Central Executive Committee of the Uzbek SSR. A pedagogical school is open for Tajik women, which has been expanded to 75 students and is currently equipped with the best forces. This year, the composition of students will be increased to 100 people. A club and a nursery are organized at pedtech-nikum. Work is also carried out through constant correspondence with places, sending circulars and sending instructors. The Uzbek SSR is inhabited by Tajiks and other areas (Khojent, etc.), here, too, work among women is carried out in all forms and in compliance with the necessary condition — application to the peculiarities of the area. At party committees there are women's departments, clubs with schools at them are organized, women's artels, women's shops, etc. are opened. An examination is carried out as needed. The main disadvantage for working among women in Tajikistan is the lack of a sufficient number of female workers from among the Tajik women themselves, but the measures taken by the women's departments should soon make things easier in this regard. Throughout the work of women's departments in Central Asia and in Tajikistan, in particular, the latter had to to wage a stubborn struggle for the emancipation and involvement of women in Soviet work. This struggle has been crowned with great achievements in recent years. We know that thousands of Uzbeks, Tajiks and women of other nationalities have thrown off their traditional veils and started social and state building. Representatives of the highest union bodies have already emerged from their ranks, thus confirming the great successes of women of the Soviet East in the struggle for their emancipation. The Komsomol and pioneer detachments play an important role in this struggle. True, the participation of girls in these organizations is still very small (only 1% of the indigenous population of Uzbekistan is 1% of the members of the KSM), nevertheless, they are a good campaign tool for young people. The undoubted successes of Soviet work among the women of Tajikistan are clear to everyone. Tajik women throw off "chishbans", go to clubs, join the ranks of the party, study in schools and, returning to their villages, are energetically working for a new way of life. These successes, achieved in some 2-3 years, testify to the imminent emancipation of women in Tajikistan, in all its social strata and regions. In conclusion to the stated O1 life of a Tajik woman, it should be noted that the traditions of the Muslim worldview, which dominate and now predominantly among the urban population of Tajikistan, serve as the reason for the at times inert, mistrustful attitude, on the part of the bearers of these traditions, to all cultural and legal measures of the Soviet government, since they are directed. In the direction of the emancipation of women and the involvement of the latter in public and state work. Common arguments against cultural and legal measures among women are the views that women are widespread in such an environment as a being completely incapable of any cultural progress. In response to this, it is interesting to cite a few examples characterizing the struggle for the liberation of a working woman in India, who, like a Tajik woman, experienced the oppression of centuries of lawlessness. The most prominent fighters for the national liberation of India are like nair. Gandhi, Boz, and others openly declared that the merit of the working woman of India in the national liberation struggle is of great importance. Such statements are fully true. From the numerous literature on our revolutionary movement in India, you can * learn that the woman / has a huge role in it, namely: she participates in agitation, in raising funds for the national fund, in boycotting foreign goods and yr. In addition, India has a significant cadre of women instructors who are sent to remote corners of their homeland and organize the masses of workers and peasants there, open primary schools, arrange arbitration courts, and even recruit volunteers to military detachments. Howl this is not only to the local woman's strength, but she sometimes does it with such energy and skill that leave behind the work of a man. That's why one of the leaders of the nat. the liberation movement of India S. Woz said: “Our progress as a nation is closely dependent on the progress of our women. Currently, women's education is acquiring tremendous importance, in view of the fact that the close, joint life of patriarchal families is rapidly disappearing under the influence of economic reasons, and large families are fragmented into small ones. Under modern conditions, women learn to be independent, and not to remain prisoners within four walls. " These words of the tried and tested Indian politician can be the best example against those ideas about the uselessness of the cultural and educational emancipation of women, which are rooted to this day in the broad working masses of Tajikistan. Knowledge, cultural growth and useful creative activities of a Tajik woman in her society and state are equally available to her, as to all working women of the Soviet Union, if only they themselves took part in * emancipating themselves from / century-old slavery, for building (New life, in close family with other eastern peoples.