4. Soviet Kurdish woman
Semi-unfair position in the family and society, observance of religious rules in views on; a woman, as a lower being, fear of the law and her husband, ignorance and terrible illiteracy (only one literate for 4,000 women) —these are the characteristic features of the position of a Kurdish woman. Here prejudices still reign, the intoxicating power of religion, social illnesses and high infant mortality — these are the inevitable consequences of the living conditions of culturally backward peoples. Even in many remote areas of Kurdistan, with the most ignorant and fanatical population, Soviet laws in the field of family and marriage relations, combating everyday prejudices and crimes, as going against age-old customs, are considered sinful. In these areas it is terribly difficult to work. Very often, a worker who arrived here for a campaign, before being given a hand, is wrapped in a half of a dress. The living conditions of a woman are determined by the economic conditions of Kurdistan. With the Sovietization, the power of the local bekoe was fundamentally undermined here. Deprived of any privileges, many of them transformed into rich kulaks. The position of women in these families is almost no different from that of the rest of the Kurdish female peasant women, who bear the whole burden of the work on their shoulders. Busy from dawn to dusk, the Dinka hens almost never leave their dugout or tent on a nomad. If we add to this that her family life is regulated by remnants of the patriarchal clan system and religious and everyday prejudices, we get a picture of the economic, legal and everyday situation of a Kurdish woman. Despite the fact that here, as in all corners of our Union, women are equal in rights with men, the Soviet code on family and marriage law, on land use, on the right to work and education was introduced, the implementation of all laws, however, encounters difficult obstacles, both economic and domestic. Early marriages, kalym, the tough land reform, all of this has deep roots in the feudal-patriarchal form of economy that is living out here, sanctified by Islam and enshrined in cultural backwardness. All this contributes to the retention of conservative forms of life. Polygamy, early marriages are mainly supported by the wealthy strata, in which they see the support for the institution of property; the poor part of the population supports these customs insofar as they are economically and spiritually dependent on the kulaks and clergy. The Kurdish woman is a little cheaper than the Turks; the average price is 20-50 sheep. At the All-Sesidic conference in Armenia, the question of the right to a woman was on the list! with a question about water and land. And the poor passed a resolution) demanding the abolition of the kalym. However, it should be noted that here the main role was played not by the concern 4 of the woman's personality and not by the desire to improve her lot, but exclusively by the material interests of the man. Poor people demand the abolition of "taxes on women", the abolition of the purchase of wives because they have nothing to pay. They can pay only with their own hump, labor, going to the shepherds, farm laborers to the father of the bride. And the poor man works for seven years until he has worked out the required amount. And seven years will run and ... a rival will appear. Will give more. The father will say: "we need to add." And the poor man is working again as a farm laborer for his beautiful bride. This phenomenon of buying brides is now undergoing a particularly stubborn struggle, led by both the central government of the Azerbaijan Republic and special organizations for work among women. But the methods and ways of this work differ significantly from other areas. First of all, it should be noted here that the exceptional darkness of the Kurds and the conditions of a semi-sedentary life with scattered settlements, exclude the use of the most powerful means — agitation through the press. Not only newspapers, but even leaflets and proclamations are still little available to them. Of the printed material, a colorful and understandable poster can most of all be used. The focus of the Kurdish woman on issues of work and life, on the issues of involving women in public life and productive work is carried out here by organizing women's activists in the villages and holding delegate meetings. Delegate meetings serve as an organizational form of work among women. The results of this, still very modest work, had already affected by 1927, there are 39 delegates in Kurdistan. At meetings, women are extremely interested in everyday issues. Often a kurtinka goes to a meeting with children several miles away and asks to explain to her the new law on registration or on divorce. The new marriage law is especially attracting attention. AzCEC yet | in March 1923, he issued a decree on a new family and marriage law, which abolishes polygamy, sets the age limit for marriage at 18 for men and 16 for women. According to this decree, a woman is equal in all rights with a man. Carrying out work on the study and improvement of the life of women in Azerbaijan is entrusted to the Committee for the Improvement of the Life workers, at AzCIK'e. There are similar committees in the county executive committees. The task of the committees is to assist women in protecting their rights through the appropriate Soviet bodies. In their daily practical work, the committees study the life of women and, on the basis of their experience, submit their proposals to amend and supplement laws concerning women's rights to the legislative bodies and take part in their development. By organizing artels and workshops, the committees improve the economic position of women. The work of the Kurdistan Committee is extremely modest, but in the meantime, it must take up campaigning for women to go to study; he must organize work to eliminate illiteracy among women. The committees also carry out certain propaganda work among men, explaining to them why a woman should be active, why she is called to the council elections, why she should be literate and go to the hospital, and not to the healer. poorly established. There are many reasons for this: the lack of experienced organizers, and the lack of funds and, finally, the extreme conservatism that the Kurdish woman shows to worries about improving her situation. The situation here is also bad with work in the field of protection of mothers and infants. Only recently, in the district, the first orphanage was opened; childcare centers and nurseries are not yet available. Along with the backwardness and darkness of the Kurdish woman, which complicates the transition to a new way of life and a new independent position, it is extremely interesting to note that in one respect, participation in the elections to the councils, a Kurdish woman is far ahead of the Turkish women of Azerbaijan. The reason for this, at first glance, a strange phenomenon is the fact that the Kurdish woman is more free in comparison with the Turkic recluse woman. As stated, Kurdish woman! (not) hides her face, she does not hide from an unfamiliar man, she has long been present at meetings of men and participates in the discussion of various issues. The participation of the Kurdish woman in the work of councils is growing every year, although it is still insufficient in number. Despite the fact that the kulaks and the clergy were campaigning against the participation of women in the re-election of councils, up to 70% of all Kurdish women came to the last elections. Among those elected to the councils were up to 25% of women. This success is generally explained by the activity of the Kurdish woman in matters of government, as well as by the habit of resolving all serious matters on an equal basis with the man. The correct conduct of the elections themselves is also important. This year, summons have been sent out to all Eligible Participants. The very fact of receiving the summons even more prompted the woman to take part in the elections. This is how Comrade Shurkan, who led them in one of the largest settlements of Kurdistan, in the village of Minkand, describes the elections: “Narrow winding streets with corridors, stone sakli, stacked with dung, barking dogs, tall tall men and women hurrying barefoot through the snow with huge water jugs tied behind their backs — such is the morning Minkand. Heaps of Kurds, Fr. pushing something with ardor, a group of picturesquely multi-colored women reaching out to the edge of the village, a flock of rushing boys - everything says that something new, extraordinary has entered the life of the village. We make our way through the narrow corridors to the Shyola building at 5-6 rooms, where some lively Armenian used to sell small change and coal, writing on the wall the number of glasses of tea drunk by the Minkend people. Balcony. Tables heaped with paper. Men are squatting by the balcony; there and then women with children in their arms settled down in a separate group. At first, with apprehension, and then louder and louder, they talk more and more lively about some of their household chores, slyly laugh at the women who come up to the balcony and take out sheets from their bosoms — election agendas. There are already one hundred and forty of them, and new ones are coming and going. ... Having given the summons, they pour into a sea of ​​wide skirts and half-open, swarthy faces, with eyes black as coals. This peculiar solemnity is broken from time to time by a friendly laugh that covers the words of Assad, who is counting the summons over and over again, there are 225 women, of 230, who received the summons, and these two bends of women's faces are burning with anticipation, anticipation of something new, unprecedented. Seeing them, a smile of self-satisfaction spreads across Asada-ami's face. When it came to the election of the chairman of the council, passions flared up, voices drowned out each other, one candidate was replaced by another. The battle was played out around two candidates. The meeting, split in two, is making noise. Each group proves the preference of its candidate. Two orators who spoke especially ardently, suddenly scatter in different directions, calling for like-minded people. And suddenly the peacefully sitting groups rush from their seats and in an instant an unimaginable hustle and bustle arises, in which everything is mixed, both men and women. They calmed down ... and began to determine the strength of each group by eye. The group of a party blacksmith clearly outweighed, and he himself, under loud applause, shifting from foot to foot, shy He smiled. The elections are over, everyone is dispersed, some smiling at their victory, others not believing their defeat. ”In Kurdistan, the growth of women's participation in the work of councils should be taken into account not in hundreds, but in tens and units. Every woman actively working on Soviet construction has enormous political significance here. In Kurdistan, in the village of Mirin, there is already a woman chairman of the village council. The village of Mirin is the winter headquarters of the semi-nomadic Kurds. It is located in a gorge among the rocks and is even invisible near it, since there are no houses in it, and all the premises for livestock and people have been dug! in the rocks. In early spring, people from smoky and dark caves crawl to the top, to the plateau, closer to the sun and cool winds, — there, above, surrounded by their sheep, buffaloes, cows, horses and dogs, spend 6-7 months before the snow. As elsewhere, there is a village council in this village, and a chairman in the village council. But the chairman of the Mirin village council, the only one in almost the entire Kurdistan, is a woman "eldashkhanum" (female comrade), as the Kurds call her. Elderly, but vigorous, with an expressive, open face and energetic movements, the tall "eldashkhanum" is calm confidently leads his small complex world, and nowhere, in any village of the pre-village council does not enjoy such widespread and unconditional authority among the peasants and such deepest trust, and almost fanatical belief in everything that the chairman does not say or advise. At first, it was strange and unusual for the Kurds to see with what ease and experience the chairman handled with a headscarf on his head when carrying out the most difficult, in local conditions, orders of the authorities. Then they gradually got used to it and now they treat their chairman with great respect. The great evil of the Kurdish village is unsanitary conditions. Various epidemics and diseases are raging in the village, infant mortality is increasing, women, due to the lack of the necessary medical personnel, use the services of healers and shepherds. Here is how one eyewitness describes the birth in the Kurdish village of Saltankand: this is an ordinary Kurdish village of 8-10 yards, long ago intermarried. A rare girl marries on the side: she usually stays with one of the countless cousins. “In a bad hour we got here: the sister of our owner, the pre-village council, the 17-year-old girl went in labor agony for the third day and no incantations of the local midwife Gekchay helped. From a dark shack with an earthen floor, on the edge of the village, came the groans of a woman in labor, throbbing on the nerves; the women sat beside her, and the men sat outside at the door. Three days without help, without a midwife, in dirty rags! To Lachin, to a midwife 26 miles, to Minkend to a paramedic — 18 miles. Far away, and then, after all, our grandmothers and mothers did without them and she will manage, if Allah wills, 'says some Kurdish Assad-ami sends a horseman to Lachin for a midwife and we, for a small green samovar, have a long conversation. Midnight was already close, we were still talking about the Kurds, about their life, when the mother of a woman in labor ran into our sakla with the news that a boy was born. To celebrate, the brother of the woman in labor chose the fattest ram and, having performed some spells, cut his throat with a sharp knife. It smelled of meat, blood, steam came from the carcass "... The Kurdish village needs, perhaps more than anywhere else, a midwife , she also badly needs a teacher. The whole matter of developing public education and eliminating illiteracy, and therefore the most essential part of the whole matter of changing everyday life, is due to the lack of the necessary number of teachers. However, even under such difficult conditions, a cadre of women who have already abandoned the old way of life and have joined the ranks of the Communist Party and devote all their strength to work among Kurdish women is gradually being created. True, the number of party Kurdish women is measured only in dozens, they are far from all possessing sufficient knowledge and experience for, work, but still they are an advanced detachment, constantly working on the construction of their Kurdistan. Over the years, along with the growth of the party activist, the Komsomol has been growing and organized. Kurdish girls, thanks to their freer position, of course, only in comparison with the position of girls, Turks, very willingly go to Komsomol clubs, schools and take up Komsomol work. The Komsomol organizations have already managed to reach a significant number of Kurdish youth and penetrate into the Kurdish village, and in all large villages they have their own cells. What are the organizational methods of mass work among Kurdish women? Again, taking into account some of the peculiarities of the situation of women here, all the work has to be started with putting together a female activist in the villages from the most conscientious peasant women delegates, social activists. Without such a female asset, under local living conditions, no work can be done. This is followed by holding general meetings in the villages of delegates with women's activism, and ventures with all women, at which delegates report on the work of the council. That besides, it is necessary to organize county-wide conferences of peasant women and organize courses for promoted social activists. Finally, it is absolutely necessary and useful to involve women members of village councils in the daily practical work of councils, to involve them in work in the registry office, in the people's court, in control over the work of schools, medical centers, etc. The main and shock work here is the struggle for the economic emancipation of the Kurdish woman, the fight against the corrupting influence of the clergy and their material base — ignorance, darkness and deceit. In addition, it is necessary to put the study of domestic and legal issues to the proper height and especially decisively fight the observed murder of women on the basis of marriage and family relations. Summing up the current situation of the Kurdish woman and the work done during the existence of Soviet power, it can be stated that: to emancipate a Kurdish woman in all areas of her life, such as the abolition of kalym, the prohibition of polygamy, the prevention of early marriages, the fight against everyday prejudices, the struggle for education and, finally, new economic conditions of life — are already yielding certain results. The party's activities to strengthen, deepen and encompass work among the Kurdish women already have certain achievements, firstly, in the quantitative growth of Kurdish women in the party, the KSM, in the councils, as well as in other areas of social construction. There is no more important task for Kurdistan than economic emancipation of women. This can be achieved through the involvement of the Kurdish woman in handicraft production, through the skillful use of free female hands, who already have production skills, for the work of handicraft artels. To do this, it is necessary to revive, successfully developing before the war, carpet production and silk spinning and start organizing handicraft artels. The economic development of our Kurdistan and the inevitably associated cultural and political development of the Kurds, is of colossal importance, going beyond the Transcaucasia. the struggle against the old way of life, old family foundations, the already fully defined turning point in the position of women and her new role in economic and social life, testify to the fact that the life of Kurds and Kurdish women is taking on new forms. But new forms of life have not yet taken shape and the Kurdish family is going through a difficult transition period, which falls heavily on the shoulders of the Kurdish woman. That is why the main attention should be paid to it under the present conditions of work.