3. Revolution and emancipation of the Azerbaijani Turk woman
In Azerbaijan, the October Revolution finally won only in May 1920. Immediately after the February revolution in Azerbaijan, as in the rest of Transcaucasia, the formation and strengthening of bourgeois-nationalist and chauvinist groups began; in Azerbaijan, the largest national group was the bourgeois-democratic party "Musavat" (Equality). This party played the role of national representation in the Transcaucasian Seim, which consisted mainly of Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries, Dashnaktsakans and Mussavatists; Thus, the Transcaucasian Seim was the supreme government of Transcaucasia, which did not recognize the October Revolution. Under the pressure of the Turks and ethnic strife, this Transcaucasian government fell, and 3 independent republics were formed in Transcaucasia: Azerbaijan, Georgia and Armenia. The Musavat Party, which was in relations with Turkey, formed the government of Azerbaijan, which was established in Ganja; Baku, with its revolutionary proletariat, joined the October coup and established Soviet power in the city and districts. But the position of this power was extremely difficult: the city was surrounded by enemies on all sides, with the Turkish army advancing on one side, the British command in the North. Persia sought to capture the city from another. The only connection with Soviet Russia was through Astrakhan, but this assistance was too distant. As a result of extreme food difficulties and a shortage of party workers, fermentation arose among the Baku proletariat and it succumbed to the English bait thrown from the North. Persia: On July 31, 1918, the Baku Council of People's Commissars resigned and power passed to the so-called "dictatorship of Tsentrokas-Piy", in which the Bolsheviks did not take part and which invited British military assistance against the Turks. The British sent help, but completely insufficient, and at the same time seized power in the Caspian Sea. The most prominent figures of the Soviet power were arrested and deceitfully sent to Krasnovodsk, which was then a real English port; On September 19, 1918, 26 Baku commissars, the most prominent representatives of the revolutionary Baku proletariat, were shot among the sands of the Trans-Caspian region. On September 15, 1918, the Turkish army took Baku, while British forces were hastily evacuated by sea. The Turks owned the city for the entire month of ID, as they had to clear the Transcaucasia by virtue of the armistice on the fronts of the world war (the Mudross armistice). Baku was again occupied by the British, this time for almost a year (until November 1919). Nominally, power was in the hands of the Mussavat government, in fact, the British command ruled, which was trying to establish a colonial regime in Azerbaijan; but it ran into the resistance of the Baku proletariat, which forced them to reckon with themselves. Since that time, the Baku proletariat maintains an underground connection with Soviet Russia, up to the moment when, after the departure of the British and the defeat of the volunteer army, they again proclaimed Soviet power in Baku on April 28, 1920. ) came face to face with enormous difficulties to pave the way for socialist construction in a country where the population continued to live according to Muslim laws and customs, where the female half of the population was almost in slavery to the male. The women's question has become and is in Azerbaijan not only as a question of cultural development, but also as one of the most important combat tasks of the revolution. But in carrying out these tasks, the Soviet government ran into enormous difficulties; the liberation of a Turk woman from the age-old oppression of a man is not only a struggle against the inertia of the masses, which, of course, is difficult in itself; but at the same time it is necessary to touch upon religious issues, since the disenfranchised position of women is, as we know, one of the main points of the teachings of the Muslim religion. To deprive a Turkic Muslim of his power over his wife and woman in general means taking away from him his age-old rights of owner; so that the resolution of the women's issue in Azerbaijan takes on the character of a profound social revolution. Under such conditions, the Azerbaijani government had to approach the resolution of this crucial issue with extreme caution. And it must be admitted that during 7 years of work the Soviet government managed to achieve a lot in this direction, taking into account the exceptional difficulty of the task. Gradually, after a series of discussions and disputes, laws are issued regulating family relations of the Turks, abolishing the previous Muslim laws and customs: prohibited polygamy is prohibited by law, early marriages are prohibited, so now in Azerbaijan a man can marry only after reaching the age of 18, a woman to marry 16 legal marriage is recognized only by a marriage concluded in the registry office in the same way as divorce is valid only then, when it is committed before the people's court. Thus, an Azerbaijani woman in her family relations is put in a position completely equal to a man by law, just like in her other civil rights. But these laws would remain a dead letter, and the Turkic woman herself would not dare to be released from male captivity, if the communist party, represented by the women's departments, did not come to her aid. The ALKSM organization also has a strong effect on the mass of Turkic women, drawing into its environment a significant number of Turkic girls, which process is especially noticeable in Baku, where students of Turkic youth are concentrated. The Turkic Komsomol women, extremely energetic and courageous by their national nature, strongly contribute to the destruction of inert relations in the Turkic family and the creation of the foundations of a new way of life. But it is not only in Baku that the Komsomol manifests its revolutionary activity; the same is happening in the counties, only on a more modest scale. The Zhenotdel under the Central Committee of the AKP scattered an extensive network of its branches throughout Azerbaijan, so that they are available not only in the district and volost centers, but even sometimes in remote auls. Zhenotdel is the real headquarters of the everyday revolution in Azerbaijan. He groups around himself in the localities all the more or less capable of social work Turk women and through them influences the inert female mass. The organizational work of women's departments in Azerbaijan is aimed, as elsewhere in the Soviet East, at creating the maximum possible maximum of women's delegate meetings; the female mass in the auls willingly gathers to promote more developed and energetic women from their midst; more or less systematic studies are being conducted with these delegates. Through these delegate meetings, the involvement of the Turkic women in the party and the Komsomol takes place. But this last process is proceeding very slowly: as of 1/1 1926, there were 1271 communists throughout Azerbaijan, of which 26.2% were Turk women. Azerbaijani women's departments strive to ensure that the Turkish women consider them "their" institutions, designed to alleviate the difficult conditions of their lives. This goal has now been achieved: in the most remote corners of a Turk woman willingly goes to the women's department to complain and consult: will her husband beat her, take a second wife bypassing the law, whether her husband or relative violates the woman's legal property rights - in all such cases, the Turk women know the way well to the women's department. Thanks to this, the actual position of a Turk woman in the family has improved, men are afraid of women's departments and, according to general reviews, behave much more modestly in family life. But in order to correctly understand the current position of an Azerbaijani woman, one must always remember what her position was before the revolution, what was then the general cultural position of the masses in Azerbaijan. It is especially difficult for a Turkic man to give up his position as master in the family, and therefore now very often one can hear in the Azerbaijani village the opinion that the whole revolution is being done for the sake of women. This circumstance shows how the female mass has stirred up, but at the same time it also speaks of what a strong opposition to the liberation of the Turk woman the backward male mass has. The backward parts of this mass prevent their wives from freely leaving the house, let alone participating in public life. It is extremely difficult for a Turk woman to fight for her rights, because for the most part she is deeply ignorant, accustomed by her past upbringing to slavish obedience to a man and crushed by the burden of masterful labor, which still rests entirely on her shoulders. In an Azerbaijani village, a man continues to be the king in his household and family, and therefore, there are still cases when the Turks, contrary to the law, have two wives: the husband divorces his former wife in court, with whom - [the second he lived according to Muslim law, and registers with a new wife; and the former wife remains to live with him on the same basis, according to Muslim law; the former wife has nowhere to go, since the main mass of the village society would be sharply against her if she took it into her head to fight for her rights as an actual wife. In the wilderness of Azerbaijan, the former customs are still very strong, and women's departments have to adapt to this environment in their work; Not long ago, the Russian chairwoman of the women's department in Nukha had to walk around the bazaar in a veil so that the local Muslim society would consider her a "decent" woman and would be easier to admit into their midst. These facts make it possible to feel the full force of the resistance that the centuries-old heritage of the past has put up among the masses to build a new life in Azerbaijan; After all, most of the modern adult generation was brought up and raised in those conditions of impenetrable darkness in which the old regime kept the Turkic people. But, as already mentioned, the mass of Azerbaijani Turks was stirred up thanks to the energetic work of the women's departments. In 1925, there were “peasant women’s corners” and women's clubs with 1080 members under 18 volunteer committees. Such a women's club in the wilderness of the county, of course, has a considerable revolutionary influence on the female mass; of course, the total number of permanent members of these clubs, as we see, is very small; but many Turkic women attend clubs without, however, becoming members. These clubs meet the ever-present need of village Turks for women's gatherings. Previously, such meetings took place only in winter, when women were somewhat relieved of heavy and continuous economic work, and the meeting place for neighbors was usually someone's warm stable. Now the village women's club not only can satisfy the need for entertainment, but there you can learn many useful and interesting things, for example, sewing on a typewriter, which is a great and tempting rarity in the county wilderness. Moreover, the clubs have organized educational centers and self-education circles in some places; in 1924-25, their number reached 34 with 479 participants; of course, these figures are negligible, the more so as in a qualitative respect these circles are very low; but, firstly, in a given cultural and everyday situation, the beginning cannot be different; secondly, the very fact, or better to say, the possibility of the emergence of a self-education circle for Turkic women-peasants, signals the onset of a genuine everyday revolution in the Turkic mass. The fact of the active participation of the village Turk woman in political life speaks about this and with much more expressiveness. As a result of the work of the women's departments, the Turkish women began not only to feel their civil rights, but also began to make timid attempts to exercise these rights; from 1923-24 the women's departments succeeded in organizing separate women's gatherings both for elections to village councils and for pre-election campaigning; since then, a kind of female "curia" has appeared in the Azerbaijani countryside, which by its existence perfectly describes the stubborn struggle of the past with the present; as we can see, the Turk woman still does not dare to step over the threshold of the room where men gather, but at the same time, having already realized herself as a Soviet citizen, she acts as her separate female group. It is interesting that these women's assemblies elected delegates to the village councils, and at present, 13.6% of all members of the village councils of Azerbaijan are Turk women; there were about 6,000 Azerbaijani peasant women who not only passively, so to speak, under the protection of the women's department, acted in the social and political field, but were not afraid to actively join the male, mainly, collective of the village council. Moreover, starting from 1925, we see Turkish women as chairpersons of village councils; in 1925 there were 5 of them, in 1926 — 12, and finally in the current 1927 — 21. It is quite remarkable that at the re-elections of the village councils this year, for the first time in pre-election and election meetings, both men and women participated together, there were no separate women's meetings, and the female mass was very active: out of 455,000 women electors, 130,000 participated in the elections. , i.e. 28%; in individual counties, this percentage increased to 75%, as was the case in the Kurdistan Region; a Kurdish woman, even before the revolution, was distinguished by great independence, while the revolution gave her the opportunity to legitimize and develop her freedom; in Kurdistan village councils, about 1/3 of all members are women. These figures, after all that we talked about the complete oppression and oppression of the Turk women in the recent past, may cause some surprise, it may seem that the Azerbaijani Turk woman has already achieved emancipation, that she is freer and more conscious than even the Russian peasant woman. But such an impression would be deeply mistaken; the election campaign represents an extremely convenient moment when women's departments can develop the maximum of their organizational energy and push the female mass to collectively defend their rights. But as soon as the Turk women return to their own hearth and work, they immediately fall under the powerful influence of the established domestic relations and the way of life at home - in everyday life, the dominant position is still held by a man. Of course, every such election does not pass without leaving a trace, they serve as a great socio-political school for Turk women; but social and political education in the given conditions is a slow and long process, and at present we are present only at its very beginning. So, over the past 7 years of Soviet power in Azerbaijan, a major shift has taken place in the everyday and social situation of a Turkic peasant woman; not only improved her position in the family, but thanks to the work of the women's departments, as well as due to the changed conditions of national economic life (elimination of landlord ownership, • cooperation, state regulation of land use,) she firmly embarked on the path of social and political education, which will lead her to de facto equality with men. In the urban centers of Azerbaijan, and first of all in Baku, the process of emancipation of the Turk woman is much brighter. In the Baku fishing and factory district we observe the emergence of the Turkic industrial proletariat, and along with the Turkic proletarian, the Turkic proletarian also appeared. At the large cotton factory named after Lenin (formerly Tagiyev) there are over 300 female Turk women, including a significant number of single familyless women; at the factory there is a women's club, liqpots, which are visited not only by female workers, but also by Turk women - the wives of workers who live right there in the factory village. Thus, the factory to them. Lenin square in Baku, with its predominantly Turkic composition of workers and employees, is the main center for the formation of an independent Turk woman of the future Turkic proletarian. An important role in the social education of a Turk woman is played by the club named after A. Ali-Bayramova. Itself |) the appearance of the building, as it were, indicates the significance that the women's issue has for Azerbaijan; this is the palace of one of the former Baku oil kings-millionaires, one of the most luxurious buildings in the city. All responsible administrators of the club are educated Turk women, with great love and skill in their work. The club has 1,400 permanent members of the Turks, at the age of 25-40, that is, the overwhelming majority of members of the club are Turks of the old generation; female youth in the city, attending schools and stages and universities no longer need a special women's club, but this youth will be discussed below. Among the members of Ali-Bayramov's club, housewives predominate who seek to acquire some kind of practical knowledge in the club or generally broaden their horizons; it is interesting to note that the club is also attractive for the backward Turk women, for whom the old customs are still of great importance: about a quarter of the club members do not dare to part with the veil; They go to the club, they are looking for new, better living conditions, but the fear and obedience of a man sucked in with mother's milk are not so easy to overcome. The club has several courses and schools in which 800 members of the club study. Vocational training comes first here; first of all, it is necessary to mention the large sewing workshop, where about 200 women are trained to sew on a sewing machine. In a huge bright hall a mass of Turk women are sitting and working diligently and merrily; they cover the army, the militia, and generally carry out government orders; Among the workers there are also Turk women from the counties, from where they are delegated by local organizations. This workshop also brings income and serves, of course, as a school of new life for women who have thus far spent their entire lives within the four walls of their city home. Further, the club has organized schools for the eradication of illiteracy, in which 660 women study; there is no need to say much about the significance of this fact, if we remember that the mass of adult Turk women is almost 100% illiterate. The introduction of the new Turkic alphabet, which is much easier to learn than a complex Arabic alphabet, should strongly push the elimination of illiteracy among Turkic women. Much attention is drawn to the vocational school, where training in handicrafts, handicrafts and applied arts is excellently delivered; at the school there is a permanent exhibition of student works, by which one can judge what great artistic abilities the Turk women have; beautiful small rugs, embroidery with wonderful combinations of colors, painted wood carvings, artistically processed clay jugs and vases — in all these works you see not blindly following the teacher's instructions, but often independent creativity. Thus, Turk women who have passed technical training at the club get the opportunity to earn money on their own and thereby strengthen the independence of their position in the family. Another type of vocational education at the club is courses for sisters of mercy; some general education is required to enter these courses, and such Turk women are among the club members; among them are also those who receive this general education, studying general education subjects in the same courses. Currently, 8 Turkish women have completed courses and are working in hospitals. On the same basis, there is also an obstetric technical school at the club, which has also given a number of trained Turkish midwives. This technical school is of particular importance for an Azerbaijani woman, since a Turkic woman is still deprived of medical care during childbirth, not only in the villages, but also in the city, where, in the absence of Turkish midwives, for the most part, they make do with home-grown midwives. Turkish midwives will not only improve the situation of women in labor; the appearance in the matrimonial bedroom of an independent Turkic woman as an authoritative person should greatly contribute to the everyday liberation of a Turkic woman, should strike a strong blow to the old masculine views of a woman as a lower powerless being. Many members of the club, having passed some, so to speak, social experience there, strive to get a job somewhere and thus obtain independence of position; the club, of course, supports such aspirations with all its might and at present it has nominated 34 of its members to serve in the telegraph and central telephone exchange, who are doing an excellent job of their duties. In addition, over 100 members of the club are employed in production as unskilled workers; they are all familyless, living alone and enjoying the support and protection of the club. These last Turk women have already completely got rid of male custody and are creating the life of a new Turkic woman, equal with a man. Several of them are already chairmen and members of factory committees, which gives an indicator of their significant professional and social activity.But the club also comes to the aid of a family worker from Turkey by setting up a nursery, where many mothers take their children for a day; These creches are really set up in an exemplary manner, and the mothers of Turks willingly work there in their free hours as nannies under the guidance of a pedologist. With these nurseries, the club provides not only material assistance to the Turk woman, but also awakens her public consciousness. From time to time, evenings and performances are organized in the club both on their own and with the participation of invited artists; these performances are very popular; initially, a mass of exclusively women, acquaintances and family members flocked to them; but gradually men appear among the guests, very often the husbands of the participants in the performances; Thus, the club not only works to free the Turk woman-wife, but also gives visual lessons on the new way of life for husbands. Ali-Bayramov's club, as mentioned, has several branches in the districts of Baku and is connected with women's clubs (“peasant women’s corners”) scattered around counties. The regional branches of the club (at the Lenin factory, in Kishly, in Akhmedlakh, etc.) are in closer contact with a Turk woman from a proletarian and almost proletarian environment. As a result of the hard work of the leaders of the clubs, it was possible to firmly establish the elimination of illiteracy (the Turks working there now agree to accept a man teacher, whom they previously refused to admit to their environment); little by little it is possible to involve the most developed female workers of Turks in social, trade union and, partly, in cooperative work; but, of course, this process is proceeding very slowly in quantitative terms. Among the institutions working on the emancipation of the Turk woman are the women's commissions under the AzCIK ("Azkomworkenits"); they organized a number of handicraft artels for women, of which hosiery workshops are especially successful. Women of all nationalities work in the workshops of "Azkomworkers", including women from Turks who find there an opportunity to earn money on their own. As elsewhere, the Komsomol plays a big and ever-increasing role in the process of liberating a Turkic woman, into which the most active young people of both sexes join. , we see that a strong organization has been created in the capital of Azerbaijan, which allows the older generation of Turks to gradually join social life, to get out of complete subordination to a man. Of course, Ali-Bayramov's club has a direct impact on a small, comparatively, part of the Baku Turk women, but it unites them into a strong nucleus, which strongly and the further, the more excites the inert female mass. We have spoken up to now about the modern Turkic woman who was brought up in conditions of the old regime and almost devoid of any kind of education. One of the main conditions for the creation of the next generations of a free and equal Turkic woman is the involvement of young women in the network of normal schools of the I and II levels. But these schools had to be created, and the Azerbaijani government ran into enormous difficulties in doing so; there was not enough teaching staff for the network of male Turkic schools, not to mention specifically female schools. But as a result of the seven-year work of the People's Commissariat for Education of the ASSR, great successes were achieved; at present (1927) there are 1,031 1st stage Turkic schools throughout Azerbaijan, in which 83,916 children of both sexes study, of which 70,012 are boys and 13,864 are girls, that is, 83.4% of the first and 16.6% of the second; training is now being conducted jointly. These figures speak for themselves, especially if we compare them with the situation that existed before the revolution, when the percentage of girls who received school education was almost zero. Of course, there is still a long way to universal primary education in Azerbaijan, but with regard to female education, the age-old wall of old prejudices has been broken. This fact is confirmed by the existence at present of 23 Turkic schools of the II stage with coeducation, with 2,217 students, of which 316, or 15 ° / 0, are girls. Here we are already witnessing an undoubted everyday revolution, although quantitatively and not particularly significant. Indeed, according to Muslim laws, grade II students would be considered to have fully reached the marriageable age and, therefore, spending time together would be considered the greatest debauchery and even a religious crime. But the Turkic girl moved not only to the schools of the first and second levels, she also went to the workers' school; at the Turkic branch of the Baku workers' faculty, out of 1.490 students from IZ, or 7.4% of women. Thus, a Turkic woman takes part in the creation of a new proletarian intelligentsia. The most remarkable thing is the aspiration of a Turkic girl to a higher school; 1.241 Turks are students in the universities of Azerbaijan, of which 332, or 26.9%, are Turks. The Turk woman, as we can see, is not limited to secondary school, but vigorously moves on; at the Azerbaijan State University, Turkish women are divided into faculties as follows: in the medical department - 62 people, in the east - 30 and at the pedagogical department - 22; it is interesting to note the prevailing interest in medicine as a specialty, which may be more than any other allows to influence the backward Turkic mass. The rest of the Turkic students work in other universities: in the higher art school, in the conservatory and in the Turkic pedagogical institute. In the higher school, the Turkic women feel completely free and study not lagging behind men; they not only end up as ordinary students, but several people have already emerged from among them, left at universities to prepare for professorship and scientific activity. This last circumstance and the general high prog center of Turkic women among university students eloquently show what rich cultural opportunities are hidden in the Turkic female mass. Despite the age-old isolation from social and intellectual life, the Turk women at the first opportunity brought forth cultural forces from their midst by hundreds and even thousands. It remains for us to sum up. The main Turkic mass in Azerbaijan lives in the countryside and small district centers. Muslim law and religion, old customs, "adats" still have a strong hold over this mass. Despite this, the downtrodden and humiliated Turk woman, thanks to the work of the women's departments, woke up and her situation improved. The old generation of Turkic women responded to the work of the women's departments and managed to distinguish from themselves a certain female “asset”. But in general, the old generation of Turk women still lives largely according to Muslim customs and experiences the care of a man, albeit in a weakened form. But the now rising female generation already belongs to the future; they go through schools and universities, women workers in all areas of national life come out of their ranks, and, of course, when they become masters of life, the shadow of the veiled Turk woman will finally disappear into the dark distance of her past. The literature on the situation of the Azeri Turk woman is very poor. In the past, there are interesting articles in "Collections for the description of tribes and localities of the Caucasus", ed. Lopatinsky, Zakharov's article is especially interesting there. There are currently several brochures in the Turkic language. The department of female workers at the Central Committee of the AKP publishes a special magazine dedicated to women's life “Shark-Kydyny” (in the Turkic language); prepares, as far as I know, for the release of the book of the head of the department of workers at TsKAKP Comrade. And sh-k about in about 5 years of work among the Turks. The pictures included in the brochure were taken from photographs by A. Alekperov.