3. Work among Mordovians during the years of the revolution
Work among Mordovians, one might say, is still in the first stage of its development. Mordovka is just awakening 'and begins to realize the need for this work. It gives different results in different places. In the Penza province, where the national face of the Mordovians is most vivid, the Mordovians are more numerous and much more attention is paid to it, the work gives great results. In other places, it is weaker. But everywhere the awakening of the Mordovian woman is noticeable, her desire to take part in social life as actively as possible. This activity often encounters a number of obstacles, which are not so easy to remove. This is primarily a lack of workers from among the Mordovian population itself, with the backwardness of the Mordovians, their poor knowledge of the Russian language, only a Mordovian woman can work successfully among them. There are very few female workers, even the staff units of the women's departments are not fully filled. In some localities, the work is carried out by Russians through an interpreter. It is especially difficult in such cases in villages with a mixed population. At one meeting, the instructor was told by the Russians that they did not understand Mordovian and would leave the meeting if the report was in Mordovian. The Mordovians, in turn, stated that they did not understand Russian. The report had to be delivered in both languages. Literature in the Mordovian language is also scarce, which greatly complicates the work, since it is not easy to swing the Mordovian even without it. In many cases, the work had to start with walking from door to door and involving individual individuals. The next step was the organization of delegate meetings — the most agitated and prepared ones fell. Widows and poor people were more easily involved in delegate meetings: they still make up the majority of delegate meetings. Only recently has the number of middle peasants started to increase. Inside the delegate meetings, the Mordovian woman seems to go through the school necessary for further social activities — she eliminates her illiteracy and acquires the knowledge she needs through travel, special lectures and courses. Gradually, delegate meetings, involving an increasing number of Mordovian women in their activities, begin to have a significant impact on the social life of the village. This is already a huge achievement. Men are not used to women attending public meetings — their presence is considered unnecessary. With this deeply rooted view, only an organized struggle is possible. Such an organized struggle is being waged by delegate meetings. As a result, a Mordovian woman who has never before attended meetings or meetings not only begins to participate in meetings and elections to councils, but she herself is elected to various institutions. So the Mordovian woman is involved in Soviet construction, 'and this involvement is noticeable in those areas where there are delegate meetings. Pre-election meetings of Mordovians are held separately in their native language. In the Ulyanovsk province, during the re-election, Mordovians were sent invitations in their native language, which immediately noticeably increased attendance. But Mordovians are most willing to respond to practical undertakings. They themselves, often spontaneously begin with this. So they are interested (and precisely Fig. 1. Delegates of the 7th Penza Congress of Workers and Peasant Women on March 8-10, 1927, ING practically) the question of price reduction. By discussing this issue and working in cooperation, the Mordovian woman is currently already actively participating in reducing prices. Great interest is shown in handicraft circles, but there are still few of them - the lack of leaders and, mainly, the lack of funds hinders their wider implantation. It should be noted that when a girl goes to a handicraft, sewing or sewing class, then the parents do not protest, considering this business useful, but if to a meeting, then there is “nothing to do”. In a number of places, on the initiative of the Mordovians themselves, practical initiatives are being carried out. So in B. Berezinskaya parish. Kore. at. Ulyan, a women's artel was organized to sell milk and eggs. This volost is generally distinguished by its desire for cooperation: all delegates are in cooperation. In some districts, public funds are organized either for the protection of mothers and babies or for helping the poor, etc. The situation is somewhat worse with regard to health education. Healers and healers still enjoy sufficient respect. But already in many places the struggle with the "grandmothers" begins. Here, the absence of medical personnel with knowledge of the Mordovian language is of great importance, which greatly complicates the appeal of a Mordovian for medical help. Thus, in one village “they do not understand what the paramedic is saying, so they don’t turn to her and go to the healers”. There are complaints about the rough treatment of midwives. The latter is a legacy of the old times, when, thanks to the policy of ethnic hatred, the Mordovians were not considered people either. Meanwhile, the high incidence among Mordovians (trachoma, etc.) makes the issue of medical care and health education especially important. Work must move towards strengthening medical help and training of health workers from among the Mordovians. It is in this context that the issue was resolved by the XIX Penza Gubernia Conference (1926). The nursery is already partly served by Mordovians who have completed the nursery courses. The number of creches in Mordovian villages is constantly increasing. Practical Mordovians themselves soon realized the necessity and usefulness of a nursery, making it possible to pull children out of a dirty, unsanitary environment. They raise and analyze this issue at volost meetings, at delegate meetings and pass resolutions on the opening of a nursery. Mordovka at the same time helps the nursery with everything she can. There are cases when delegates went with signature lists around the village to gather at the nursery, and the population responded sympathetically to this. Thus, the Mordovian is more willing to participate in practical activities. Sometimes there are complaints from the localities that the organizers do not always take this into account and do not consider the organization of practical work as their business. In many cases, practical work often begins spontaneously, at the initiative of the Mordovians themselves. But for this they lack the funds and leadership. One organizer ', speaking about the work among the Mordovians, remarked: "Now, if there were a sewing machine, then there would be no lights out." This practicality is reflected in the fact that the Mordovian woman is more likely to go to work in cooperative institutions, she organizes small cooperatives (gardening, fishing, etc.) and, in particular, longs for circles of needlework, sewing and sewing. Demands for them are distributed from all over the Mordovian regions. Through practical measures it is easier to involve the Mordovian woman in social work and in the party. In the party, however, it still amounts to a very insignificant amount — literally one. This is explained by her complete isolation from public life in pre-revolutionary times, her underdevelopment, which prevents her from often carrying out active work. The number of girls in the Komsomol organizations is also very small. On average, they range from 3.8% (Siberia) to 8% (Penza. Gubernia) - the composition of the Mordovian Komsomol. Yes, and those who already work in the party or in the Komsomol, the political level is low, and the active Mordovians - the parties and the Komsomol - are very small. The small number of girls in the Komsomol is partly explained by the fact that parents do not like it when girls go to meetings. Here again [the most acceptable way is through the organization of circles for practical purposes that do not cause negative attitudes. In addition, the small number of literate, developed girls plays a negative role. Mordovka's education is in a deplorable state. Girls make up a very small percentage in primary schools. Their number in secondary and higher educational institutions is even smaller. We have already indicated that the reason for this is the entire past life of the Mordovian, which did not leave time for learning. The disdainful attitude towards the girls 'studies has remained even now, although the overall growth of the pupils' faces is significant, and their craving; k (there is no doubt about education. Often girls are not allowed to go to school because they study together, and parents consider it shameful, they fear that the girl will deteriorate. hooligans. ”Even this reasoning is a significant concession, because previously they considered teaching unnecessary, now they recognize its benefits, BUT they are only afraid that the girl will“ spoil ”with joint education. The same can be said about involving girls in the pioneer movement. One must think that in the near future this will also be eliminated. In any case, with only 3.6 v / v literate muzzles, and the slow increase in girls' pupils, which is observed now, is a tremendous achievement. One cannot expect that the accumulated ignorance for centuries and prejudices so immediately and will be destroyed. Little by little, the Mordovian woman begins to penetrate into the secondary school, (mainly, pedagogical schools) universities and so-called party schools. The main obstacle on this path is there is also poor preparation. Therefore, at a number of educational institutions, special preparatory departments are being opened for Mordovians. Work to eliminate illiteracy among Mordovians is carried out through educational centers, reading rooms, red corners and other political and educational institutions. After the October Revolution, a strong craving for learning awakens in Mordovka, and as early as 1922, women in some villages passed resolutions on organizing literacy schools. However, to accomplish this, it was necessary first of all to prepare a sufficient number of workers from among the Mordovians themselves. Annually, for this purpose, dozens of Mordovian girls are sent to pedagogical schools and other educational institutions, so that upon graduation they can work in the mass of the Mordovian population. The growth of political and educational work is characterized by the growth of grassroots political institutions in the Mordovian countryside. From 1926 to 1927 in five provinces (Nizhegorodsk., Ulyanovsk., Penzensk., Samarsk. And Saratovsk.) This growth was from 40 to 60%. Courses are being held for huts and illiteracy liquidators, which are gradually increasing there are cultural forces of the Mordovian village. Four newspapers are published in the Mordovian language, designed for the masses, and so on. Mordovka learns to go to the reading room, where she often has a special day. On this day, conversations are held on issues of interest to her, often judges and doctors make reports - and a woman learns to protect her health, defend her rights, etc. Newspapers and magazines are read collectively, after which they discuss emerging issues. Work is underway with women and at gatherings. In some places, they begin to publish their wall newspapers, raising and discussing my painful questions in them. It is interesting to point out those issues that interest the Mordovian woman and are discussed at women's meetings. In one volost, for example, the following questions were posed: 1) Where did the tax go under the old regime? 2) How do women live in capitalist countries? 3) On the measures taken by the Soviet government to eliminate the shortage of goods, etc. These questions show the breadth of the needs and interests of Mordovian women. Mordovka also penetrates the trade unions, we see her in club work, she herself often, as indicated, spontaneously organizes various circles, in addition to those that exist on the initiative of the women's department. Even in distant Siberia, the Mordovian woman does not lag behind her Volga tribesman, and there she gradually takes the path of social work, we see her in councils, at meetings, etc. If we want to sum up the work among Mordovians, then we must admit that work this, which began 2-3 years ago, has so far gone through its first stage — it was not yet planned, in many cases it grew spontaneously and only now is entering the path of continuity, planning and depth. Its shortcomings naturally follow from what has been said: a shortage of workers, an interruption in work, not always sufficient attention from the party and Soviet lower cells, etc. These shortcomings are deepened by the scattered population of the Mordovia. Thanks to this, it is difficult to take into account the work done so far in its entirety — what has been said here is, of course, very incomplete and only gives a certain idea of ​​the whole work. At the same time, the achievements of the work are very significant. First of all, the fact that with all the scatteredness of the Mordovians is of great positive importance, there is no longer a corner where the Mordovian woman has not yet awakened. She, who had never participated in public life before, is now in many cases an active social activist. She who did not know the doctrine before, she now strives for it and learns. Having never picked up newspapers, she now writes them herself. She puts on plays in the Mordovian language, begins a fight against midwives and "grandmothers," organizes artels, circles, helps her poor neighbor with united social efforts, etc., etc. It goes without saying that the party and Komsomol organizations are the main conductors of this work. From 1 / VI to 20 / USh 1927 in Moscow, at the initiative of the Department. Workers and Peasant Women of the Central Committee of the CPSU (b) held courses for workers among women nationals. There were 35 Mordovians on these courses. The courses not only provided the Mordovian village with a number of comrades fully prepared for work among Mordovians, but for the first time they summed up the work done so far among Mordovians throughout the USSR, since these courses were attended by Mordovians - representatives from all sides of our Union. The disadvantages and merits of the job were equally accounted for here, so that experience aided in deployment. further work, which entered a more profound and wider stage.

4. Digital materials on work among Mordovians.
Delegate meetings in 1925-26 covered 1804 Mordovians. To date, this number has increased. So on the Penza lips. in 1925-26 there were 730 delegates, in 1927 there were 972 cases. mordovoks. An idea of ​​the social composition is given by information to Penz. lips. (in 1927) - farm laborers - 0.8% (and in general v / v laborers in the province 2.3 v / v), middle peasants 26% (and in total 35% in the province) And most of the poor. In some counties, delegates' meetings are still almost entirely composed of poor people. Girls - 20%. There are more widows than married ones. All peasant women. A number of conferences and meetings on work among women have been held (Nizhny Novgorod, Penza Gubernia, etc.). During the day of March 8, in some places, delegates staged performances in the Mordovian language, etc. The number of ox organizers is insignificant in Penza. and Samara lips. in total — 11 (paid) .2. In 1927, in the Mordovian villages there were 415 cells with 3105 party members. We do not have exact figures on the number of women, but in any case this number is very insignificant. So on the Ulyanovsk lips. on 1 / U11-26 there were only 8 Mordovians in the party (for 193,000 of the population of Mordovians), in 1926 in the Penza province. accepted 4 Mordovians in the party, etc. Girls in the Komsomol make up from 3.8% (Siberia) to 8% (Nizhegor. Gubernia) of Pioneers in 4 provinces for 1/1-1927 - 2695. The percentage of participation in re-election of councils is from 10-15% to 60% of all women. During the last re-elections in Penza. lips. 260 pre-election meetings were held among Mordovians. By Penz. lips. last re-election. The number of Mordovians elected to the councils increased from 258 to 338. In total, the number of women members of village councils in the Mordovians and villages of the Penza province. is 7% 'in VIK'ah - 13%. In Ardatovsk. at. Ulyan, G. took part in the last re-elections of 2016 Mordovians (6.5% of all Mordovians who have the right to choose) 1). 13 women were elected to the village councils. (1.1%), to the executive committees - 6 (10.4%) and 1 to the PEC members. To Bu-guruslan. county participation in the re-elections in 1926 - 15.6%, 1927 - 21%; in Samara u. 1926 - 20%, 1927 - 24.4%, etc. Women take part in the work of other Soviet institutions, and Nakzh ^ in cooperation.3 "Literacy of the Mordovians — Penza province — men — 22.2 %, women - 3.6%; Ulyanovsk province - men 24.9%; women - 3.1%; Samara city — men — 21.4%, women —6.9. In five provinces (Ulyanovsk, Nizhegor., Penz., Samar., Sarat.) In the Mordovian villages there were) schools of the 1st stage — 1926 — 636, seven-year-olds — 7, nine-year-olds — 2, peasant youth schools — 4, pedagogical schools — 4 and Mordovian branches at the Nizhny Novgorod and Samara workers' faculties. In 1925/26, 136 Mordovians were sent to universities, but only 67 were admitted (due to poor training). Izb-reading room - 130, red corners - 620, liq-points - 488. During the year, courses for huts were held (4) - 120 people were graduated and 135 liquidators of illiteracy graduated at various courses. In 1925-26 it passed through the health centers, Nizhegor. lips. 1457 people Mordovians, of whom 672 are women. The percentage of girls in schools is no more than 25-30%. The following figures partly characterize the state of education of Mordovians. In Buguruslansky district in 1923-1924 from among all those who entered schools 1 st. there were 12о / 0 (girls, in 1924-1925-17%, 1926-1927-20%. In the Malotolkayskaya seven-year school, there were 44 girls out of 115 students, and in the pedagogical college 66 out of 127. (1926-27). volosts are successfully involving Mordovians in voluntary societies, out of 472 members of the Island "Down with illiteracy" - 111 Mordovians. 4. The degree of provision of the Mordovian population with medical care: in Penza province. in Mordovian villages - 3 hospitals (8.2% of the total number of hospitals , while the Mordovian population in the Penza province totals 18%.) To increase medical assistance to the Mordovian population, special detachments are practiced to combat trachoma and venereal diseases. Health education is underway - its size is still small. In Mordovian regions there are orphanages, playgrounds - but their number has not been taken into account. Recently, the number of nurseries in Mordovian villages has been increasing, thanks to the help of the population. There is no digital material for a number of branches of work among women, but there is no doubt that this work is being done (protection TV, participation in the work of judicial institutions, etc. The figures given here are very incomplete and sketchy, since the work among Mordovians has not yet been summarized in digital materials. These figures only give a partial idea of ​​the work among the Mordovians. More materials on Penza Gubernia, which in general can be considered advanced in work among the Mordovians. For the present, the numbers of achievements should naturally be slightly increased. When writing this brochure, in addition to a number of works and materials related to the general history and ethnography of the Mordovians and the author's personal observations were used , who himself was a Russified Mordvin, spent a number of years in a Mordovian village - the following sources: 1. Polumordvinov (ed.) Mordovsk. pop. Penz. lips. 1927.2.Shakhmatov.-Mordov. ethnography, collection. 3. Materials (reports, summaries, etc.). Department of Workers and Peasant Women and the Department of Nationalities of the Central Committee of the CPSU (b) .4. A number of information received from the organizer on (work among women - the Department of Workers and Peasants of the Ardatovsky Ukom of the CPSU (b) (Ulyan, g.) T-Naumova and others ...

CONTENTS Page From the publisher ................ • ............. 31. General outline of the Mordovians ............... ............. 52. The life of the Mordovians before the revolution .............. 183. Work among the Mordovians during the years of the revolution .... 254. Digital materials on work among Mordovians. .35