3. The October Revolution and the ways to emancipate a Chechen woman
After the October Revolution and until the spring of 1920, the North Caucasus in general, and Chechnya in particular, was the theater of a fierce civil war. When the old regime fell, all the tension of the national and land issues immediately came to light in Chechnya; but it immediately became clear that opposing interests of the Chechens and the Cossacks clashed here; this opposition of interests was felt especially sharply between the poorest Chechen population in the mountains and the prosperous Cossacks on the plane. We already know what was the essence and basis of these contradictions — they were the necessary result of the violent colonialist and Russification policy of the old regime government. IN! 1918-1920 the region of flat Chechnya was under the rule of Denikin's white armies, relying on the Cossack population and army. The counter-revolution continued, in relation to the Chechens, the violent policy of the old government, it tied itself with the interests of the wealthy Cossack population and thus acquired the worst enemy in the person of the overwhelming poorest part of the Chechen people. The auls and mountains of Chechnya provided hospitable shelter to the red insurgent units on the Terek, and their chief, Comrade. Gikalo, who in the end Yub 'united these units into the 12th army. In the spring of 1920, the North Caucasus joined the RSFSR, and Chechnya then became part of the Mountain Autonomous Republic, which by 1924 was divided into several national units and districts, one of which was the Chechen Autonomous National Region. The Soviet government led the national-territorial delimitation of the North Caucasus on new foundations, the main goal of which was the possibility of national self-determination for each of the peoples living in the region. Chechnya received those lands on the plane, which were taken away from it by the Russian government in the early 19th century, for which the population of 4 Cossack villages was accordingly regrouped. This provided the material foundation for the work on the regulation of Chechen land use. The administration of the Oblast was formed on the basis of national autonomy and with extreme caution began Soviet construction. The whole difficulty of this task will be easy to understand if we recall at least those few information about the Chechen people that are given in this book above. The creation of a state apparatus that should interfere in intergeneric relations with the help of its Chechen agents requires extraordinary self-sacrifice from these latter; militiamen, for example, who, on the one hand, must carry out the orders of the authorities on arrests, etc., on the other, as members of a clan organization, are exposed for their actions to the danger of blood feud. In fact, any member of the Regional Government is in this position. Of course, the condition that facilitates the work is the sympathetic attitude of the broad masses of the people towards the Soviet regime, but this is precisely why the work of state and cultural construction had to and must be promoted; at a slow pace. At present, the foundation has been laid for cultural development among the Chechen people, primarily by the fact that, so to speak, the Chechen writing system has been constructed; this most important moment in the cultural life of every nation, which for a part of European peoples took place at least two millennia ago, for the Chechens happened quite recently, today, after the annexation of Chechnya to the Soviet Union. The sounds of Chechen speech are conveyed in Latin letters, and now in Grozny the newspaper "Serdloo" - "Svet" is published in the Chechen language, books and textbooks are being printed; word from now on the Chechen people will record their life experience with the help of the printed word. The significance of this fact is so enormous that it is simply impossible to assess it in short words. Further, a solid foundation has been laid for public education by setting up a network of 105 first-level schools, instead of 2-3 schools available for Chechen children in pre-revolutionary times. Work is underway to eradicate illiteracy, two technical schools for Chechen youth, pedagogical and agricultural, have been founded.Much has been achieved in the provision of medical care to the population; most of the main settlements of Chechnya now have hospitals and outpatient clinics, the attendance of which is growing every month. As for the old "adats", many of which are incompatible with Soviet social and state life, their elimination should be a matter of a not very, near future ... First of all, this includes the custom of "mustugul-la"; recently a special commission for the elimination of blood feud was organized, which included all Chechens respected by age and status; this commission was supposed to reconcile by the established custom by means of all available "bloodlines"; her work everywhere on the plane was a complete success, and required extreme stress. But for the future, the activities of this commission, of course, did not extend and individual families continue to become “mustugulla” to each other. This campaign has not yet been carried out in the mountains. One of the most important issues of social and domestic construction in Chechnya is, as elsewhere in the East, the question of women; for it is impossible to lead a people to socialism whose woman is enslaved before this enslavement is eliminated. But working on the emancipation of a Muslim woman means touching not only the old customs, but also the Muslim religion itself, which, as we have seen, provides for an absolutely dependent and humiliated position of women. To snatch a Muslim woman from the power of a man means to deprive him of the property that belonged to him for centuries, with all the material benefits that the possession of this property brought. The emancipation of a Chechen woman, thus, represents the deepest social revolution, which, at the same time, is one of the most the first and impatient tasks of the revolution. How did the central Soviet and party bodies approach the resolution of this, at first glance, almost insoluble issue? Considering the present cultural state of the Chechen people, as well as the specific hatred among the masses of the state for coercive measures that was created as a result of the actions of the tsarist administration, The Chechen autonomous national power has so far little intervened in the family and everyday life of the Chechens by legislative means. Therefore, it would not be a particular exaggeration to say that at present in Chechnya the most revolutionary institution is the Chechen Department of Workers and Peasant Women under the Regional Committee of the All-Union Communist Party. Step by step, slowly | and (cautiously [attracted the attention of the dark [and downtrodden female masses, the Chechen “Zhenotdel” won their trust. It sent experienced and seasoned workers to remote auls, who organized their own small headquarters under the district and volost executive committees). Every Chechen woman could come here with a complaint about some kind of (drinking male violence, or simply for advice in difficult cases of her difficult life. Of course, in the beginning, few decided on such a revolutionary violation of the age-old submission of a Chechen woman to male will; but when the chenenks began to gradually become convinced that the women's department can help and helps, that men are forced to reckon with this institution, the women's departments began to acquire wide confidence of the female masses. The women's departments awakened in the Chechen woman the consciousness of her civic East. In Chechnya, the best form of work among women turned out to be organizational ia "women's circles" at the local branch organizations; these circles gradually grew around these organizations, most often by attracting first the wives and relatives of local Soviet and party workers; From time to time, women's meetings were organized, at which the village "spite of the day" and the personal affairs of individual participants and questions of domestic and foreign policy of the USSR were discussed. Such meetings were the only place where Chechen women could abandon their daily domestic life, where, feeling like hostesses, they could spend time with pleasure and benefit. It is not surprising that the popularity of these gatherings grew rapidly, more and more women circles arose, and the number of the former increased. At present, the total number of female circles in Chechnya reaches 46, each comprising 30–120 women; this can already be considered a conquered base for the further development of the women's movement. The strength of this base is evidenced by the fact that now there are regular women's meetings in 42 auls, with 1,457 permanent members. These meetings are the first and very effective school for the social and political education of the Chechen woman; here the connecting threads are drawn between the oppressed female masses and their representatives in the Revolution — the Department of Workers and Peasant Women. Since 1927, women's delegate meetings have also been organized, regular meetings of the female “activist”, which has emerged from the female mass grouping around the women's departments. We can, to a certain extent, regard female delegates as the first Chechen women working for the emancipation of a Chechen woman; while they pass, tay say, the alphabet of social literacy, but maybe not much time will pass, and; the current timid students will turn into energetic teachers. There is now in Chechnya a women's club in the village of Alkhan-Yurt on the plane, which it has now decided to turn into an exemplary one. This club occupies a special and fairly large premises, with very clean and comfortable rooms; a drill workshop is organized here and there is occasional training in other handicrafts. But the main content of the club work is social and political; the club is attended by up to 170 Chechen women, it is also a permanent place of women's delegate meetings; delegates show great jealousy for the performance of their public duties, for the most part, they are middle-aged and elderly women, and if they cannot come to the next meeting, they often send their daughters to make appropriate statements; this small detail shows well what a profound shift has taken place in the mass of the old generation of Chechen women. At delegate meetings of the Alkhan of the Yurlov club, broad public issues are often discussed; great success, for example, are the conversations about the women's movement in the West, about the position of women in Russia and in Chechnya before the revolution and now; it is easy to understand that such questions touch the delegates for a living and are sufficiently "relevant" topics to revolutionize the inert thought of Chechen women and direct it along the public channel. Facts show that the work of women's circles and delegate meetings has yielded real practical results; it is a Chechen woman who is gradually beginning to act as a social and even political worker, going beyond her passive role in women's circles and delegate meetings. We currently have 560 women out of 3,300 members of the Chechen cooperation; moreover, the Chechen woman has also penetrated into active workers of the cooperative society: throughout the region we find 30 women among the members of the board of cooperatives. Women are especially active in the "Peasant Societies for Mutual Aid" (KOV'ah). The KOV's are predominantly a cooperative organization of agricultural credit, brought about by the complex lease relations in the Chechen countryside and, in general, the extreme instability of most Chechen farms. It is clear that the main worker of these farms, their labor force, a woman, is vitally interested in the work of KOV, who comes to the aid of the peasant in difficult times. But it is worthy of all attention that now the Chechen woman herself decides to go to a public institution for help, she herself takes part in its work, and does not grant, as it was quite recently, this leading role to a man. Among the members of the KOV there are 129 women, of which 66 are on the presidiums, 58 are members of the audit commissions; finally, there are mountain women among the KOV's directorships. Of the 129 participants, 124 are active workers — these numbers speak for themselves. Even more revealing is the performance of a Chechen woman in the political arena, as a member of the village council, and here we see the results of the persistent and long-term work of women's departments. Two years ago there were only a few Chechen women in the village councils; now there are about 800 of them. When the women's departments finally succeeded in moving the inert mass of Chechen women, the results of persistent preparatory work immediately affected. And observers from the localities report that mountain women do not passively enter the village council, but show themselves to be active and businesslike members; they vigorously oppose attempts to resolve matters "on a family basis," that is, leave old economic relations unchanged; this is understandable, since the overwhelming majority of these representatives of the emancipating Chechen woman belong to the poor and middle peasant stratum, and almost half of them are widows and divorced. In other words, the most disadvantaged women, both economically and socially, get to the village councils, the more acutely they feel their female powerlessness; this fact is, of course, extremely favorable for further work on the liberation of the Chechen woman, since the banner of struggle unfolded by the women's department immediately fell into reliable hands. The energy of this advanced female troop is all the more surprising since it emerged from a truly "dark kingdom." In relation to the Chechen people, it is generally difficult to talk about literacy, since we know that literacy simply did not exist in their native language; literacy in a foreign language is difficult and inaccessible to the masses. According to statistics from 1927, literacy (mainly in Russian) in Chechnya was 0.9%, that is, there were 9 literate per 1000 people, and among these 9 there were probably also non-Chechens. Nevertheless, we can talk about the literacy of Chechen women. The Chechen Narobraz faces the immense task of spreading education in an almost absolutely studentless country. This task is even more difficult in relation to the female mass; in 80 schools of the 1st level, 4,600 Chechen children study; only 250 of them are girls; but it is almost possible (I can probably say that if it were not for the help of the women's departments, many of these 250 would not have ended up in school; after all, the girl, as we have seen, is an employee in the family, and the school takes this worker away; according to the old there is no need for a girl to study male views, therefore, the head of the family would hardly let the girl go to school without sufficient “pressure” from women's and women's organizations. ”It inhibits girls' attendance at schools and their lack of warm outerwear, which, according to custom, women are not supposed to wear; In this regard, the work of the women's department also eases the situation. But, of course, the main attention of the women's departments is paid to adults, and here the Department of Workers and Peasant Women came to the aid of the Narobraz.At the Alkhan-Yurt club and in some other places, women's health centers have been established, where 259 Chechen women This figure cannot be denied as a significant achievement, given the general living conditions of a Chechen woman.The Chechen Department of Workers and Peasant Women also introduces vocational training for Chechen women; he organized several schools of sewing, drilling and hosiery, where over 100 women study. These schools have, of course, the strongest educational and developmental influence. In addition to learning a craft, here girls and women acquire social skills, receive some, it is true, very elementary and peculiar, but still political education. Through the women's divisions and institutions, the process of involving Chechen women in the Party and the Komsomol is underway; but, of course, according to the objective conditions described above, a Chechen-communist at the present time can only be a rare phenomenon; so it really is. As for the Komsomol organizations, they are much more accessible to a Chechen girl; she is involved in the Komsomol through vocational schools, or as a sister or relative of a Komsomol member. The Komsomol of Chechnya currently has 5,000 members, of which there are 89 Komsomol members; this figure is by no means small, if we take into account everything that has been said above about the Chechen woman; it must be remembered that each of these 89 is, so to speak, (power centers that exert (a strong and broad influence on the surrounding women! masses. The pioneer movement is developing quite successfully in Chechnya; the number of pioneer detachments reaches 3,000 children, and this, despite , for an extreme lack of leadership forces; but there are very few girls in the detachments. * Here, of course, all the same general living conditions, which, undoubtedly), will be overcome, thanks to the activities of all the same women's organizations; both the vocational school and the sovart school and the orphanage are places where girls are involved in pioneer movement; Chechen women usually come to the sewing school, to the vocational school, with their daughters, and the leaders use this circumstance for appropriate agitation. So, we see that thanks to the tremendous work done before Until now, by the Chechen Department of Workers and Peasant Women, the deeply backward and inert Chechen female mass has moved from its place and is now going to meet a new The 1st Regional Congress of Chechen women, members of the Oelsots, who gathered in Grozny in October 1927, was an excellent expression of this fact. The congress was attended by 146 female delegates representing the overwhelmed mass of Chechen women in village councils, female delegate meetings, etc. The age of those who gathered is interesting, first of all: 126 Chechen women were 24-40 years old and above, or 86.3 o / o were Chechens of pre-revolutionary generations; 78 out of 146, i.e. 53.40 / o of the women who gathered were widows and divorced; these figures show that the women's movement in Chechnya has captured the deepest strata of the female mass, and not only the youth. The Congress decisively discussed all major issues of internal politics; and it turned out that all these questions affect women in one way or another; and no wonder: the figure of a working woman can be made a symbol of the national economy of Chechnya. A very lively debate arose according to the reports of the Regional Land Administration, Health Department, Narobraz. The speakers were asked a lot of questions, which, on the one hand, reflected the great desire of women to take an active part in the construction of a new life, on the other hand, all those diverse (Obstacles encountered on the ground by a Chechen woman who wants to fight for her civil rights. and land reclamation, the delegates made very practical proposals, especially on the issue of water use on the plane. At the same time, bitter complaints were heard that the local authorities did not allow women to participate in public works, that they prevented girls from attending school, and that it was generally necessary to combat male oppression. It is interesting that according to the report of the Health Department, the delegates asked the speaker a lot of questions, many of which were of a very intimate nature. In general, the congress showed its full competence in construction issues, focusing most of its attention on land use and land management issues, as well as on the tasks of popular, mainly women's, education. It was decided to take all measures to involve girls in grade 1 schools, for which it was recommended to arrange, if possible, separate groups of girls; To eliminate illiteracy, it was considered necessary not only to establish educational centers, but, mainly, to arrange long-term courses for Chechen women, from where female illiteracy workers and women organizers in general would emerge. The 1st Regional Congress of Chechen Women, Members of Village Councils, was a bright and a clear proof that the first and most difficult steps on the path to the emancipation of the Chechen woman have already been taken. The Chechen woman emerged from her age-old imprisonment and energetically set about not only building her new and free life, but at the same time creating better conditions for the political and (economic life for the entire Chechen people as a whole. There is no special literature on the situation of Chechen women) There are separate instructions in general works on the ethnography of the Caucasus'; here it is necessary first of all to mention the work of Berge "Chechnya and the Chechens" in the "Caucasian calendar" for 1860, then the article by U. Laudaev in "Collections of information about the Caucasian Highlanders "; Leon-tovich" Adats of the Caucasian Highlanders. "Recently, a number of works on the North Caucasus have been published, one way or another (touching upon the issue of the position of Chechen women; from these works we point to: K. Batuyev" Zelimkhan " North Caucasus ";" About those who were called abreks "- published by Chechnarobraz; Martirosian" Socio-economic foundations of revolutionary movements on the Terek "; collection" North Caucasus after regionalization ", Rostov-on-Don. .1925.