4. Afghan woman after reforms
The course taken by the young emir Amanullah Khan to reorganize the country, to cleanse it of feudal remnants, could not but affect the position of women. Having ascended the throne after the coup d'etat and the death of his father, he first of all dismissed the wives from his father's harem, allowing them to to arrange their future life. The emir himself has one wife, so by personal example he campaigns for monogamy, in addition, he conducts propaganda against polygamy through his administration. A practical measure in the field of regulating marriage relations was the law on the size of the bride price. A certain amount has been established, more than which the bride's parents cannot be paid. This (• was done in order to weaken the profitability of the sale of daughters and sisters, and, thus, this law strikes at the most shameful phenomenon in the life of an Afghan woman - her buying and selling. This law also aims to facilitate marriage for the poor classes of the population and is aimed against unnecessary expenses for weddings and funerals, sometimes undermining the well-being of entire households. It should be noted, however, that this law is often secretly circumvented. This event bears clear traces of our legislation. As you know, in the eastern republics of the Soviet Union ransom brides, "kalym", is strictly prosecuted by the law. Another very important legislative measure is the abolition of slavery. Slavery was officially abolished under Abdur-Rahman, at the end of the last century. But this law remained only on paper. In fact, slavery and, therefore, the slave trade continued to flourish, and in 1921 the emir issued the following order, which, we quote in full, as he gives common features of everyday life in relation to slavery and the position of slaves. Here is the order: “It is regrettable that some glorious and respectable persons own slaves and slaves, although, according to the orders of the Most Serene Sharia, the possession of the latter is not allowed. The peoples and tribes of Islam, which are free, cannot keep slaves and slaves in their homes. After this (order), persons who have fallen into a humiliated state of slavery, in the form of slaves and slaves, must be released without delay and without delay. If someone previously had cohabitation with a slave, from whom he had children, but until now, out of ignorance, did not conclude a marriage union (agreement) with her, according to the rules. Sharia law, must enter into marriage with her and issue her a marriage document, subject to agreement with the Sharia orders on the observance of her rights. If someone, under the guise of some kind of cunning, for example, under the name of a servant, or under the name of his child, wishes to detain a slave, then this is not allowed. He must unconditionally remove her from his house, giving her the right to go wherever she wants. If someone violates this order and will keep the slaves from the above (in the order) in his house by force, then a fine from 1,000 to 2,000 rupees per capita is collected from the owner of the house. After this order, the buying and selling of slaves of any tribe is prohibited. If someone starts buying and selling slaves, then wherever they are, they are declared free. ”From the content of the order it is clear what kind of tricks are used in Afghanistan to exploit slaves. It is clear that even now not all slaves have been released, that many still carry the slave yoke under the guise of servants or children. After all, liberation under the law, with the downtrodden and helplessness of a woman, with material insecurity, is not enough to actually free a slave. Where should she go when, apart from freedom, she has nothing for her soul? Nevertheless, formal release is a major step forward. A new criminal code was introduced, which was intended to supplement Muslim legislation and soften some of its provisions. This code abolishes torture and the husband's right to punish his wife. The new criminal code borrows a lot from the Turkish criminal code, since the emir generally tries to imitate Turkish models, as the most acceptable for the Muslim population of Afghanistan. Innovations taken out of a Muslim country do not irritate the faithful as much as imitation of European countries. Judicial practice, however, shows that under the new order, crimes are often punished in two ways: both under the Sharia and under the criminal code. In the field of education, a broad program of universal free 'compulsory education was outlined. First, the whole work of enlightenment was in the hands of the mullahs, who taught children only spiritual "sciences." Now the Ministry of Education has developed a curriculum, which includes both the exact and the humanities. However, the teaching of this program is still entrusted to the clergy, as there are no trained teachers at all. Rural schools often lack permanent teachers. Teachers wander from one village to another.To eliminate this deficiency, a teacher training school was opened; foreign teachers and instructors are invited; the most talented * of students were sent abroad to take courses in European educational institutions. In 1920, a girls' school for 20.0 female students was organized in Kabul, which is supposed to be expanded into a secondary school, and several other schools. According to the 1927 budget, 27 new schools for boys and 3 schools for girls are planned to be opened in Afghanistan. In 1923, a women's and children's hospital was opened in Kabul, the first and only hospital in all of Afghanistan. In 1926, a woman gynecologist recommended by the People's Commissar for Health was invited to Kabul from Moscow. Finally, in order to involve at least the Afghan court women in the achievements of women's emancipation (emancipation), the emir invited the famous activist of the Turkish women's movement Khurshid-bey-khanum as the court lady of his wife. Afghan women rarely appear in public places. Wrapped in their veils, they slowly move along the rows of the bazaar, stopping at individual shops to choose ribbons or other trinkets for themselves (household items and estimated supplies are bought by a husband or servants). When a male customer appears, they quickly move aside, disappearing into the crowd. On the last day of the great holiday of Ramadan, women gather in some garden, where they sing national songs and hang out. Only on this day can they take off the veil, but men are not allowed here. In 1921, a theater was built in Pagman, the summer residence of the emir, which is also accessible to women. Since women are not allowed to sit next to men in the theater, the boxes are so built that those who sit in it see the stage, but they cannot be seen from the audience. In 1924 a second theater was built, which also hosts film screenings. Here, on certain days, only women are allowed into the gallery, and thus women are guaranteed a visit to the theater and cinema. The repertoire is very poor, the artists are just learning to play under the guidance of a learned Indian - the director of the theater. The plays show the struggle between the new and the old, the benefits of enlightenment, etc. Cinema films, For lack of funds, old, and very often, undemanding Kabul viewers are shown pictures glued from random remnants of worn-out films. may seem very modest, in reality they are a big event in Afghanistan, this half-savage, backward country, where the influence of prejudices supported by mullahs, spiritual shepherds, is very great. Among the backward strata of the population, urged on by the mullahs, these innovations caused a storm of indignation. A wave of uprisings, riots and banditry directed against the new regime has spilled over the country. The insurgents' demands repeatedly pointed to the reforms concerning women as violating Islamic law. In 1923, a proclamation was issued with the following content: “Oh, Emir, why did you give up the honest Koran, why did you give a woman the right to live of her own free will? Where is the woman's honor and Sharia law left? ”And during the Khosta uprising in 1924-25. a demand was put forward to close the women's school, in which the students, in addition to the Koran, were taught the sciences of the infidels, that is, secular sciences: geography, mathematics, chemistry, etc. And so was the movement against women's emancipation that they had to give in. The women's school was temporarily closed. The new edition of the 1925 Criminal Code was published in amended form; some types of punishment were restored and, by the way, the husbands were again given the right to punish their wives. He began to carry out the plan of reforms that had been outlined more firmly. How much the old is still strong, can be seen from the following case. Charlotte Ghai from Berlin in 1921 married Abdullah Khan, an Afghan tobacco merchant who lived in Berlin. A few years later, they went to Kabul, where he joined the government service. After his death, she not only could not take possession of the property of her husband, from whom she had children, but, as it turned out, according to the laws of the Afrid tribe. she herself became the property of the tribe. In view of her refusal to marry her husband's brother, the opa was sent to the bazaar to be sold as a slave. The German representative in Afghanistan, who was involved in the case, freed her, paying the highest price charged for her. The Afghan government then stated that all this took place on the territory of independent tribes, not subordinate to the Afghan government. However, this fact testifies to the rights that are still preserved in many places, such as the situation of the Afghan woman in modern Afghanistan. As you can see, in this recent dark kingdom, the first glimpses of the emancipation of a woman are already outlined. But the swift and stubborn movement of the whole country towards progress and the example that stands in front of it at its northern border, the example of our Union, is a guarantee that here too soon the future will change.