5. The current situation of the peasant and working woman
Agriculture, cattle breeding and a fairly developed small-scale handicraft industry are of major importance in the economic life of Turkey, as noted above. All these economic conditions determine the economic, legal and living situation of the Turkish peasant woman. The life of a worker on a farm, manufacturing various household items, caring for livestock, working in the field, in gardens, on tobacco and poppy plantations (opium dressing), employed since dawn before sunset, that is the lot of the Turkish peasant woman. Poverty and destitution have long put her in the same position as a man, if necessary, for the latter, involuntarily remain deaf to the religious interpretations of the ulema and actually violate the seclusion of a woman. In addition to the household, the Turkish peasant woman in many regions is employed in the handicraft industry for the manufacture of various fabrics, carpets, embroidery and leather and wood artwork. In this work, and especially in the manufacture of carpets, a child-girl, who works 10-15 hours a day, without straightening her back, stands alongside the woman. Somehow nobody pays attention to this terrible exploitation of child labor. The Turkish handicraftsman does not work for himself, but for the owner-buyer, who is not limited by anyone or anything in his arbitrariness and in his exploitative appetites. As the handicraft peasant industry is displaced by the cheaper factories of the West, the peasant woman is forced to abandon the countryside and go to work in the city or as farm laborers, since agriculture alone, with a significant tax pressure, is becoming more and more difficult for a peasant family to live on. For the simple reason that a Turkish peasant woman is busy with work, she enjoys great freedom in everyday life, although the life of her family is still regulated by the remnants of the clan system. That is why the women's movement has always been limited only to the city. Most of the demands of urban women were alien to the countryside, while the peasant woman did not deal with political issues. The city woman showed no interest in her struggle for emancipation to the needs and demands of her country sister. This alienation of the urban woman from the peasant woman is one of the weak points of the Turkish women's movement. In Turkey today, when national liberal ideas have been implemented, the ruling groups are unable to hide the poverty of the peasantry and the exploitation of the working class. As we have seen, the activities of the women's union in Constantinople and similar organizations in Anatolia, following the path of the Western bourgeois movement, begin to emerge in bold relief. reduced to philanthropy. Having received some rights, the urban Turkish woman remains almost passive in the struggle for voting rights, for improving the conditions of women's work. Meanwhile, the developing industry in Turkey imperiously pulls women into the factory as day and seasonal workers. Female labor is used very heavily here. Thus, in Turkey, as elsewhere, during the years of war and devastation, a female proletariat is growing. More than ten thousand Turkish women are already employed in various branches of labor. There are no full-fledged trade unions in Turkey. The underground trade-union organizations, if they exist, are too weak to protect the interests of the workers, and are limited to the propaganda of general professional ideas and the professional education of the workers themselves. The lack of statistics in Turkey does not allow us to give detailed Figures that would paint a Turkish worker lives. Let's try to give a few numbers. For example, at carpet factories, usually adult weavers receive 25-30 piastres per working day, girls — 10-15 piastres — both on their grub. Legs curled up, a weaver sits in front of the loom on which they stretch her carpet, and weaves, without getting tired, without being distracted to the side, from dawn of morning to dawn of evening. For lunch, there is no hard drink; you are not supposed to go out of your own need without asking, therefore, you often do not run here. Of this earnings, uncontrollably ripped off by the employers for fines, female workers pay about 3-4 percent of various taxes. Turkish female workers take an active part in the struggle against entrepreneurs to improve working conditions. Thus, at the economic conference held in the city of Smyrna in 1922, four women workers of the Smirnov tobacco factory and one peasant sang the workers' delegations. The economic and political demands of the workers displayed there formed the basis for a number of measures in the field of labor legislation, completed the appearance in 1926 of the draft Labor Code. However, there are no achievements in relation to female labor. The working day for a woman, as well as for all workers, is set at 60 hours. a week, with a rest for 1 hour a day during work '. A restriction was adopted only for the work of adolescents who are employed at the age of at least 12 years, and for workers in mines who must be at least 18 years of age. Finally, the code seeks to regulate the relationship between workers and entrepreneurs. The new labor code applies only to the strictly regulated work of large enterprises; if it is carried out, work in handicraft establishments with engines of up to 5 horsepower or having no more than 10 workers is excluded; it also does not apply to agricultural work. But in modern Turkey, most of the workers are precisely in the small handicraft industry, where enterprises number no more than 10 workers or workers 'are families of handicraftsmen doing work at home. The Labor Code absolutely does not have any questions of tariffication of wages, basic' requirements on general labor protection, as well as issues of sick leave and insurance of workers. The rights of professional association, organization of mutual assistance are severely curtailed and are rather prohibitive. Strange as it may seem, it must be noted that, under the current conditions of their work, it is not the work of adolescents that is characteristic of enterprises that are subject to the CX dex, but the work of an adult woman, which is regarded equally cheaply with the work of a teenager. Teenagers, on the other hand, still make up the main frame of only small handicraft enterprises of the semi-domestic type, which just do not fit the new labor code. The labor of the worker is bypassed by the new code. Needless to say that the Turkish worker, who now fills weaving and paper mills, enterprises of the taste industry, fruit and drying factories, silk spinning mills and tobacco factories, who in general makes up 20% of the total number of workers. in extremely unfavorable conditions, both in terms of remuneration and in terms of labor protection at work. The communist movement in Turkey is also spreading among female Turkish workers. When the Turkish Communist Party was in existence; legally, she had fifteen female teachers, workers and one peasant in her ranks. A special women's magazine was published. At the present time, under the leadership of the Communist Party, a female worker is undergoing political studies and is participating in the struggle for equality. Despite the repressions against the most active representatives of the women's labor movement and even arrests, some of them, like the poet, handicraft and communist Yashar Ne Ziyye, arrested in 1925, is becoming very popular among the working class. Every year, a Turkish woman worker is more and more torn away from home and family, and thus a new type of Eastern proletarian is being developed, an ardent and courageous defender of her rights and the rights of workers. The very fact of the awakening of a Turkish woman, expressed in the fact that she begins to reach for knowledge, to seek to improve their position, takes part in a social movement, is drawn into the national revolutionary movement and even partly in the mainstream of the Communist Party - testifies first of all to the social and cultural underpinning of the country. A typical sign of the Turkish women's movement today is its the prevailing bourgeois-intellectual character. Unlike other, more developed countries of the East, there is still no real workers' movement for women, there is no female peasant movement, and even more so, no female communist movement. But it must be remembered that in the transitional period experienced by Turkey, in the period national-bourgeois revolution, the existing women's movement Nation and its organizations harbor a significant amount of revolutionary energy and are undoubtedly capable of supporting many of the demands of both the peasant population and all working people. It is only necessary to expand the work more widely. Due to these properties, the existing women's organizations (unions of equal rights, societies of teachers, etc.) with their cultural work are at this time fellow travelers and allies * of the Turkish working masses. As already noted, the bulk of the Turkish peasant woman was not captured by the movement. and very little has been done to involve the village woman in the struggle for political equality and change in everyday life. A fact of exceptional importance in the life of a Turkish woman is the new family law, which will undoubtedly yield colossal results both in terms of improving the position of a Turkish woman and in changing family life and morals. The revolution of morals is more difficult and more difficult than the social and political revolution. In Turkey, it is just beginning and will undoubtedly change the manners, way of life, raise the position of the Turkish woman and give her political equality, contrary to the wishes of the backward reactionary forces, still led by the powerful Muslim clergy. It should be noted here that just as the Turkish political revolution took place under the strongest ideological influence and with the friendly help of the peoples of the USSR, the entire cultural life of new Turkey, and above all reforms in the field of everyday life and a radical change in the position of women, undoubtedly reflected our roar solution and all that new in the field of law, education of youth, emancipation of women, which has been achieved by the peoples of the USSR.