3. Chinese working woman
However, even with the existence of all this onerous order of things, the position of women of the wealthy classes or aristocracy was, of course, immeasurably better compared to the truly terrible condition in which the woman of the Chinese working masses is. A wealthy Chinese woman, when she got married, brought her husband a dowry, which to some extent mitigated her fate. Material well-being, as is usually the case, created a peaceful family environment, devoid of the acute anger that accompanies hunger and poverty. The bourgeois Chinese lady, just like her companions in Europe and America, very quickly * gets used to her position and is completely satisfied with her simple, but secure life. She is rarely interested in social life and participation in the people's liberation struggle, therefore, as we will see later, it was not this stratum that was called to lead the women's movement in China. The situation is different with the working Chinese woman. As soon as a girl in a peasant or working Chinese family reaches 8-9 years old, she must leave her relatives in order to become a source of income for them. The choice before her is twofold: either a "tea house" or a factory. Numerous colonial novels, short stories and fashionable plays often feature "charming", "graceful", etc. tea houses, which have already become a traditional attribute of Far Eastern exoticism for Europeans. Very few people imagine the full horror of these legalized and poeticized dens, in which thousands of Chinese girls, often children, driven there (by the inexorable scourge of poverty. The rapid industrialization of China after the world war led to Despite the fact that male labor in China is sold for a pittance, it does not seem to be profitable enough for foreign entrepreneurs and indigenous capitalists, and they begin widespread recruitment of women and adolescents into enterprises. crushed by the weight of taxes and extortions, suffering from landlessness, more and more ruined by the endless civil war, accompanied by robberies, requisitions and other delights, serves as a huge reservoir from which industry constantly draws this human material. The demand for female and child labor is becoming even greater reinforced by the development of the professional movement in China. Capitalists, in particular the Japanese, prefer to use the labor of women and children as an element that is less amenable to organization and therefore not dangerous. The number of women workers is especially high in the textile and silk industries, which are concentrated mainly in Shanghai. For example, Shanghai has about 600,000 workers. The relationship between the number of men, women and children employed in enterprises of different nationalities in China is characterized by the following table (see page 2E), which shows how enormously important is the role of wives in China's industry. presents a terrifying picture. Wages, as already mentioned, are here at an unparalleled low level. In Shanghai and Guangdong, wages are higher than elsewhere, but even here an adult, skilled worker earns a maximum of 20 Americans. dollars a month, women workers earn no more than 10-12 dollars a month, as for the payment of ore for children, which include girls under 16, it does not exceed 5-6 dollars. In other, smaller, industrial areas of China, wages are even lower: for adult women it does not exceed $ 8 a month, for children and adolescents 3-4 dollars. If we take into account that wages are paid on the basis of a fully worked month, and the wages for days missed due to illness or not fully worked days are deducted from it, it becomes clear what a beggarly hungry existence a Chinese worker is dragging out. For all the undemanding and unpretentiousness characteristic of the Chinese, these pitiful pennies cannot satisfy the most elementary needs, condemning the masses of children and women to slow death. Receiving such a beggarly wage, a Chinese worker is at the same time obliged to do hard labor. The working day in China is 13-14 hours; work begins! at 7 am and lasts until 7-9 pm with a break of 1 hour for meals. Children start working a little earlier than adults in order to prepare everything for work, and after the end of the working day they stay for some time to clean up workshops and other factory premises. Thus, all workers essentially spend the whole day in the factory and often stay here overnight. In appalling, unsanitary conditions during the night shift, they spend short hours of their rest in order to start the same hard day at dawn again. It is even harder for a female worker than man. In addition to earning money, she also bears the responsibility of caring for the family, children, and the entire meager, beggarly household of the Chinese working class family. Spending all day in the factory, she must leave the children to fend for themselves; therefore, she often takes them with her to the factory, where they remain until the end of the work. The worker ties the infants on their backs and continues to work in this position; older kids run around the factory, risking every minute to die under the cars, and then fall asleep right there in baskets, or on the floor, breathing in the unhealthy, dusty or steamy air of the workshops. Food, of course, is the most unsatisfactory. The food that the workers get at the right hour is usually cold, at best it is a handful of boiled rice; in addition, in most enterprises, there is no boiled water, which leads to frequent gastric diseases; In the Japanese factories in Shanghai, there is a rule that restricts workers from going to the restroom — a bullying 'that destroys the health of the worker. Besides all this, female workers have to endure a lot from male administrative staff. Flirting with female workers is extremely common and further aggravates their already difficult life. To reject the insolent harassment of the factory bosses means to be inevitably thrown out into the street, that is, face the threat of starvation. In many factories there are rules according to which female workers (unlike male workers) cannot leave of their own accord and in this case they are not given either the wages or the deposit they made upon entering the factory. Labor protection at industrial enterprises in China is extremely poorly established, as a result of which accidents with workers are very frequent. Such is the boundless exploitation of the Chinese proletariat, which includes a huge number of women and children. These working conditions are so terrible, the suffering of the Chinese workers is so conspicuous that even the British should have celebrated them. Officially published in London in 1925 in London, the book Paregs hesresip La-Loyur Cynonis wisp 1), containing the reports of the British consuls in China, gives a terrible picture of the life of Chinese workers and women workers. The Beijing government, under the influence of the growing labor movement, had to accept some measures to change the working conditions in industry. Such a measure was the publication of the Act on Labor Protection in Factories, published on March 29, 1923. This law somewhat softens the terrible regime that existed in industry. It prohibits entrepreneurs from using child labor; boys under 10 and girls under 12; night work is only allowed for men over 17 and women over 18. The use of adolescent labor in all unhealthy and life-threatening industries is completely prohibited. This act then introduces for the first time provisions, to some extent aimed at protecting motherhood, hitherto completely unknown to the Chinese industry, providing women before and after childbirth for a total of 5 weeks with maintenance, at a slightly reduced rate. Of course, this situation is far from ideal, but for a Chinese worker, who is still forced to continue working immediately after giving birth under the threat of being deprived of a piece of bread, such a privilege would be a great relief. 'The whole trouble, however, is that this law has remained an ordinary piece of paper. Due to the lack of a supervisory apparatus, such as a labor inspectorate, no one monitors the implementation of the new rules. Therefore, according to Woodhead, publisher of the English newspaper Beijing End Tian Tzin Times, these rules “remain completely unknown to the Chinese authorities in most of the country and no attempt has been made anywhere to enforce them.” This law applies only to foreign enterprises. settlements, but even here its violations and deviations from the rules are quite frequent. In general, the position of the female worker in most factories remained the same. The rule of 'granting a week's leave to an employee before and after childbirth is almost never applied in practice, since the workers themselves, fearing dismissal, refuse to take this leave. The shameless, egregious exploitation of the Chinese worker continues. From childhood, a woman falls into this bondage; completely losing her personal life, breaking away from her children, she becomes a slave to a machine that sucks out all her blood, destroying her health. A little by little oppressed Chinese woman) realizes the need to fight against this exploitation, joining the ranks of the fighters for the emancipation of China.

4. Women's movement in China
The disenfranchised and semi-slave position of the Chinese woman was the result of the economic and social order and was reinforced by religious norms (Confucianism). True, there were periods in the history of China when women enjoyed broad rights and even had supreme power, but this, of course, only concerned women of the privileged classes. In the third century AD women have been given access to social activities, and it is known that many of them have made their way to senior positions. In the same century, for the first time, a woman, Empress Lü from the Han dynasty, sat on the Chinese imperial throne. In the Seventh Century, in the era of the Tang Dynasty, Empress Wu, an autocratic and despotic woman, seized power — by the end of her reign, she had reached megalomania. This empress strove to introduce complete equality of rights between women and men; under her, women were admitted to public tests, withstanding which they could enter the civil service. However, as in previous cases, this reform proved to be short-lived and ceased to exist along with the reign of its creator. Finally, already in the XX century, we again see a woman on the throne of the Heavenly Empire in the person of the famous reactionary, the Dowager Empress Tsi-Xi. In the seventh century, some privileges were granted to women by Emperor Tang-Ming-Huang (Tang Dynasty), a representative of the Chinese "enlightened absolutism" who promoted the arts and sciences and abolished the old common that women were required to cover their faces with veils. However, all these reforms were aimed at to the improvement of the position of the Chinese woman (of course, women of the privileged classes) "and her equalization in the rights of men were episodic and were not firmly grafted into everyday life. On the contrary, over time, the enslavement of women became stronger. In the past centuries, there were no preconditions for The closure of access to education, difficult material conditions, power, tradition and custom made the woman of the lower classes an educated, downtrodden and often conservative.Such conservatism is still especially strong in the Chinese countryside, whose everyday life has remained the same was many centuries ago. More fertile ground for feminist ideas in the privileged strata of Chinese society, where the number of educated women was gradually increasing and who, earlier than others, came into contact with foreigners who brought Western ideas about Nseng equality. The first beginnings of the women's movement took place precisely at the "top" and were of a very narrow and purely bourgeois character; so it should be noted the existence of a secret female society "Golden Orchid", which expressed women's protest against the oppression of marriage; the girls who belonged to this society swore an oath never to marry, but if they were forced to do so, they resorted to suicide. This society caused serious alarm in the ruling circles and incurred severe persecution. However, these aspirations extended to a very small and closed circle of Chinese women and did not penetrate the masses, to whom they were alien and incomprehensible. In the history of the Chinese women's movement, it is necessary to especially note the activities of the ardent revolutionary and social activist Qiu-Jin. Coming from a bureaucratic family, Qiu-Jin decisively breaks with the oppressive conditions of life, leaves her family and devotes herself to the Chinese revolutionary movement and especially to the struggle for the emancipation of a Chinese woman. She begins propaganda in favor of the elimination of the custom of bandaging the legs, equalizing the rights of women with men and active participation of women in the social movement. Qiu-Jin in 1905 joined the ranks of the revolutionary party led by Sun-Yat-Sen (later transformed into the Kuomintang party. After an unsuccessful uprising in the Jiang-Su province, Qiu-Jin was captured by the Manchu troops and in July 1906 was executed in Qiu-Jin was a forerunner of the participation of women in China in the revolution, but at first only a few women from among the Chinese intelligentsia followed her path. The process of capitalization of China gave the impetus to this mass modern movement. The development of the commodity economy fettered the village with city ​​and drove tens of thousands of peasant girls into industry. We already know the difficult, gloomy conditions that existed in Chinese enterprises for all workers, and especially for female workers. However, the process of drawing the Chinese female masses into industry had some positive aspects. for production, the Chinese girl parted with that conservative, Old Testament way of life, which brought up and her obedient slave. She quickly becomes familiar with the urban culture, observes the social activities boiling around, sees the efforts of the advanced part of Chinese society aimed at uniting the homeland, at fighting against foreign invaders and indigenous reactionary satraps; participating in production activities, earning a livelihood with her own labor, she gets used to seeing herself as a completely independent person and seeks to win a position equal to that of a man. Working in the factory, along with thousands of other women workers, awakens in her a sense of class solidarity, intensified by the influence of unlimited exploitation. Thanks to all these whale conditions Women workers are becoming the social group that is called upon to lead the revolutionary women's movement and become its core, concentrating around itself other more backward and less organized strata of Chinese women.For the success of the women's movement in China, it was necessary to spread literacy among the female masses and create a significant number of educated people. knowledgeable leaders. At the beginning, female youth rushed to foreign schools and colleges, since these were the only educational institutions where a girl could receive a more or less broad education and join Western culture. However, * these schools, especially those in England and America, filled with the usual puritanical hypocrisy, bigotry and boastful chauvinism, very soon ceased to satisfy the emancipated young Chinese women. The harsh reality and conspicuous methods of foreign oppression did not fit the principles that were presented to them by foreign educators who were trying to prove that foreigners are disinterested benefactors and friends of the Chinese people, called to heal all their ulcers with the light of the Anglo-Saxon civilization and the Christian faith. The exploitation of workers in the enterprises of foreign capitalists, the mockery of foreigners against the Chinese on their own land, the shooting of the Shanghai peaceful demonstration in 1925, the bombing of the defenseless cities of Wangxiang and Nanjing and many other acts of foreign imperialism proved to the Chinese workers and women workers all the sweetness of the fruits of this notorious civilization and pushed women's movement to the camp of revolutionary nationalists fighting for the liberation of China. The women's movement becomes part of the national revolutionary struggle. The Kuomintang Party, which put forward in its program the slogan of the emancipation of women and her equal participation with men in public life, seeking to improve working conditions, Chinese workers and women workers, attracted an increasing number of Chinese women into its ranks. The schools for women workers opened by the Kuomintang attracted most of the female students from foreign schools. A special women's section is formed in the Kuomintang, which is growing and gaining strength every day. The Zhenotdel of the Central Committee of the Kuomintang, even before the great offensive of the revolutionary troops in the North, launched extensive work in the province of Guangdong, in the propaganda and political education of the female masses; Through the efforts of the women's department, special women's workshops were organized, at which there are evening courses for female workers studying literacy and the basics of the Kuomintang program. One of the most prominent female workers of the Kuomintang women's department is the widow of the leader of the Chinese revolution, Sun-Yat-Sen, Sun-Ching-Ling. During the life of the late leader, she was invariably his faithful student and assistant. Now she is actively working by joining the left wing of the Kuomintang, being recently elected to the Central Committee. Sun-Jing-Ling opened a school for the political education of women in Hankow in February 1927, attracting many female students. Of course, there are two trends here too: one more conservative, represented by women of the very Chinese bourgeoisie that inspires the right-wing Kuomintang, who believes that perestroika the life of a Chinese woman, based on a thousand-year tradition, should be carried out gradually, the other should be radical, striving for radical immediate reforms. The correspondent of the American magazine "Aba" Anna Strong, who visited Canton in 1925 and with the assistance of the widow of Sun-Yat-Sen, who attended a meeting of the Kuomintang women's organization, notes this controversy between moderate and extreme elements; a representative of the moderate Liao-Chun-Kai, the widow of a prominent revolutionary, a prominent worker of the Kuomintang women's section in her re-Ris. 3. Sun-Tszii-Ling, the wife of Sun-Yat-Sen. chi advocated the need for a careful, gradual approach to the struggle against the old way of life, which had been entrenched for 3000 years and still extremely strong among peasant women, where leg bandaging still exists, the former form marriage, etc. Her speech was rebuffed by a representative of the working youth, who argued that such half-hearted methods were useless and that a decisive struggle was necessary. “Weizhou Walls were also strong for 3 thousand years, but our Wampu cadets took them,” she concluded. ') • For the first time, the participation of a woman in the anti-imperialist struggle was manifested in the student movement. Female students in large centers in China, along with male students, actively participated in organizing demonstrations and boycotts against foreign imperialism. Such cases took place: after the signing of the Versailles Peace Treaty, which illegally ceded the original Chinese territories to the Japanese, when the students organized a grandiose boycott of Japanese goods, during numerous anti-imperialist demonstrations in Shanghai and Beijing. In May 1925, riots broke out in the Beijing Women's High Normal School, directed against the administration and took such a sharp form that the authorities decided to close the school altogether. Since the women's movement and the participation of women in the general revolutionary movement relied mainly on the female intelligentsia, the present period is characterized by the transition of the leadership role to the workers. The involvement of women workers in the Chinese professional movement, numerous women's strikes, the growth of political consciousness and the activity of women the movement has found its social base. In Canton, where the power of the national Kuomintang government has existed for several years, the professional movement among women has developed much more successfully than in other areas of China that were under the rule of reactionary militarists. The organization of trade unions and their struggle against the capitalists in the large industrial centers of Central and North China was extremely difficult because of the political conditions that existed here. However, workers and women workers are waging a relentless and stubborn struggle, expressed in a grand strike-zone movement. Shanghai became the center of this movement — the citadel of foreign imperialism in China. In 1923, there were more than 60 strikes in textile factories in Shanghai, in which over 15,000 female workers took part. In 1924, the strike movement was accompanied by intensified trade union organization, which was hindered by entrepreneurs. Meeting in Canton on May 1, 1925, the II All-China Congress of Trade Unions consisted of 287 delegates, representing 165 unions, which united up to 540,000 workers and women workers. The main demands put forward by the Chinese working class and the Kuomintang party are: freedom of association and strikes, an 8-hour workday for adults, a ban on night work for teenagers under 18, 8-week maternity leave and an 8-week postpartum leave for hard-working women labor and six weeks for other workers, equal pay for men and women, etc. e. The next All-China Congress, which met in May 1926, already consisted of 500 delegates, including 15 female workers. Most1 Chinese trade unions are united in the All China Federation of Labor, which, according to the decision of the Chinese Congress of Trade Unions, joined the Red Profintern. The involvement of the female workers in the Chinese trade union movement is extremely important for revolutionizing the Chinese women's movement. The events in Shanghai in the summer of 1925 were a powerful new impetus that shook the laboring masses of women and intensified the activity of women's organizations. In February 1925, protests began in Shanghai against the intolerable regime in textile factories, the Japanese company Nagai Wata. The management of these factories systematically fired male workers, replacing them with women, who, of course, were shamelessly exploited, setting their daily wages at 20 Mexicans. cents (20 kopecks); in addition, abuse and beatings, unreasonable dismissals, etc. were often practiced.The strike, in which 40,000 workers and women workers took part, lasted 11 days and, thanks to the staunchness of the strikers and the intervention of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce, ended successfully, however, the Japanese capitalists verbally acknowledged the demands workers, continued the old methods. At the same time, workers' unrest began in the Japanese factories of Qingdao (Shan-Tung province), where the Japanese suppressed these unrest by brutal repression. In Shanghai, a textile workers' strike resumed, accompanied by clashes between workers and the administration, during which 1 worker was killed and 30 workers were wounded. On May 30, 1925, on this occasion, a grandiose peaceful demonstration of workers and students was organized in Shanghai, which was brutally shot by the British police of the Shanghai settlement. These events, which sparked a new general strike, shook the working class of all of China. Women's organizations were also active and militant. The women's movement, until then concentrated in Guang Dong, swept the entire country, assuming a pronounced anti-imperialist militant coloration. Up to 24,000 women workers have already taken part in the strike movement at the textile, silk and tobacco factories of Shanghai. 4, Workers rally in Canton. Workers' Day on March 8, which was first celebrated in China in 1924 in only one Canton, the next 1925 was already organized in other large cities of China: in Shanghai, Beijing, Tian Tzin in the provinces Hu-nan, Hu-Bei, Shandun, etc. About 1 million women took part in these grandiose female demonstrations. In Canton, in addition to female workers, more backward female artisans and peasant women were involved in the March 8 celebration. The organization of these demonstrations was carried out by the Chinese Communist Party, in full contact with the Kuomintang Women's Department. Under the Central Committee and all the provincial organs of the Chinese Communist Party, women's departments were organized to develop energetic activities primarily among female workers. Since then, the women's movement in China has assumed a certain communist tinge. The desire of conservative elements to prevent women from participating in the preparing national conference of China provoked a violent protest from women's organizations, which realized that the immutable truth that the more complete emancipation of the Chinese woman can be achieved only through the Communist Party. “We have suffered defeats so far because we have not sharply differentiated ourselves from the possessing classes. If the women's movement does not go hand in hand with the communists who seek to overthrow the power of capital, then its goal - the liberation of working women - will never be achieved, ”says the appeal of the women's department of the Shanghai Kuomintang organization. In the areas occupied by the reactionary generals, women's organizations all the time participated in popular movements and demonstrations against imperialism and its agents. In Beijing, during a large anti-Japanese demonstration, three female students participating in the demonstrations were killed. This circumstance further inflamed the militant and revolutionary fervor of the women's movement; in the provinces of Changsha and Hu-Nan, a campaign was organized to recruit women into the ranks of the Kuomintang party, dedicated to the memory of these 3 victims, as a result of which many women joined the Kuomintang. In Central China, women made up about ZOO / o in demonstrations against U-Pei-Fu, who at that time still ruled in the valley of the river. Yang Tzu. The great offensive of the Cantonese army, which began in the summer of 1926, and the rapid occupation of the most important regions of Central China was noted in Fig. 5. Women's detachments in the Revolutionary Army. The tremendous upsurge of the revolutionary mass of the masses. The advancing Cantonese troops in the occupied regions received an enthusiastic, joyful reception from the workers and, most importantly, from the peasantry, hitherto apolitical. The women's section of the Kuomintang also developed an active work to organize the female masses in the occupied provinces and to serve the national revolutionary army. Women organize medical services, Red Cross units, propaganda cells, etc. Here is the appeal of women's organizations to the soldiers of the Cantonese Army: “The popular offensive aims to free the people from the yoke and tyrannical control of the imperialists and to extend the Kuomintang power to northern China. The success of the offensive depends on each of you. You must be willing to sacrifice yourself for the interests of the people. A revolution can never be the work of one person. Everyone, be he a man or a woman, should take part in the common cause. We women, not being able to fight, voluntarily undertake propaganda, medical assistance and service to the army. May this help you in our common mission of fighting the imperialists. " At the present time we are faced with the fact of differentiation of the Chinese nationalist movement. The leadership of the revolutionary movement is leaving the hands of the bourgeoisie, frightened by the growth of the class struggle and occupying a half-hearted position, and passing into the hands of the working masses, led by the left wing of the Kuomintang together with the Chinese Communist Party. The powerful political movement of the proletariat, culminating in the March workers' uprising in Shanghai, which placed it in the hands of the Canton Army, revealed the colossal role played by the working class in the Chinese revolution. Likewise, the women's movement in China is losing its vague intellectual character, merging with the general labor movement. The female workers who have become the vanguard of the women's movement are increasingly drawn into trade unions and are drawing closer to the Communist Party, realizing that the full triumph of the idea of ​​women's equality can come only after the overthrow of capitalism. The fact that 2 women were elected to the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party indicates an increase in the role of women workers in the Chinese communist movement. The right flank of the nationalist movement is too conservative for a woman in China to expect from it a radical change in the foundations of the old way of life. Now the Chinese revolution is waging a decisive battle against all hostile forces. The future of the new China depends on the outcome of this deadly decisive struggle. The success of a genuine national revolutionary movement, breaking the yoke of foreign oppression and Chinese reaction, together with it will break the narrow framework of the old way of life and turn the Chinese toiler from a slave, oppressed in the Family and "tea houses", mercilessly exploited in factories, into a free, equal member of society. building a new China, on a par with his fellow man.