4. Women's movement in Persia
For many centuries, a regime of oppression and oppression of the Persian woman took shape. The conservatism of Islam and especially the feudal system, which has not yet been completely outlived to this day, has given it special stability and strength. While in other eastern countries there has recently been a number of indicative shifts aimed at improving the legal and social status of women, the position of women in Persia has changed little. The Persian woman is still beaten and humiliated, she is still completely under the rule of the dead letter of the Qur'an and numerous prejudices. The influence of the mullahs on the mind of an ordinary Persian is still very strong, the activity of a Persian woman in the struggle for her emancipation is still very weak. The history of the women's movement in Persia does not shine with special diversity and significance. The Persian Women's Movement is the story of single Persian women who received a European education and tried to free a woman with their personal activities and example. The women's movement in Persia originated around the middle of the 19th century and had a purely cultural and educational character from its very foundation. The role of women in history Persia is extremely humble. It would be more correct to say that the Persian woman almost never figured in the political history of the country, as an active and effective element. Without touching on the wife of Nasr-ed-Din-Shah, who, according to some European observers, allegedly enjoyed a colossal influence on her husband-shah and at the same time on the general state life of Persia, influence, by the way, deeply controversial and inflated, let us note another Persian woman, daughter of the Kazvin mullah Kurret-ul-ein, who left a bright mark in the religious movement of the Babis, who attracted significant masses of the Persian people to their side. Babism is a religious sect that arose in Persia in the middle of the 19th century. Its founder was a native of the mountains. Shiraza-Mirza-Ali-Muhamed, who called himself "Babom", that is, ("The gate of truth"). With its rapidly growing influence, vivid preaching, often in an acute form, scourging the Muslim clergy and advocating for the equality of women, the new religion soon became the subject of severe persecution by the Persian government. So in 1850 in Tabriz the "women" themselves were executed, then numerous executions of his closest students and followers took place. In some cities of Persia, uprisings of the Babis broke out, suppressed with terrible cruelty by the Persian government. The role of Kurret-ul-ein (coolness of the eyes), as the daughter of the Kazvin mullah was called, in this movement was very great. In all corners of Persia, she preached the foundations of the new Babid religion, skillfully and talentedly criticizing the reactionary laws and customs of Islam. After the assassination (in the early 19th century) of Nasr al-Din Shah, who is believed to have fallen at the hands of a Babid, persecution of adherents of a new religion takes on especially acute forms. There is a form of beating of people only suspected of this dangerous heresy. Kurret-ul-ein does not lay down her arms all the time, her sonorous voice is heard wherever there are ears to listen. Kurret-ul-ein is one of the first women in Persia who dared to take off her chador, who dared to appear at numerous gatherings with an open face. How great was the strength of this outstanding Persian woman's insolence can be judged by the overwhelming impression that her appearance in the streets and bazaars produced. Her great personal charm, ability to speak, prove and win over listeners repeatedly saved her from the lynching of numerous fanatical fanatics. In the end, Kurret-ul-ein was nevertheless seized by the authorities and executed in Tehran in 1852. Stunning details have come down to us. "her execution. Kurret-ul-ein, already being placed against the wall for execution, asked permission to address the soldiers with the last words. When she was allowed to do so, she made a passionate and passionate speech, after which she herself ordered the soldiers to shoot. Activities Kurret- ul-ein, which developed although on the basis of the religious teaching of "baba", in many respects confused and half-hearted, but nevertheless definitely opposed to many reactionary customs of Islam, should be considered the first glimpse of the women's movement in Persia as it is understood in the present The significance of Kurret-ul-ein lies in the fact that she was the first single woman to bravely appear in the wider public arena well, that she was the first Persian to achieve immense popularity among the masses. In addition, her personal fearlessness and heroism, which became almost legendary, in subsequent generations of Persian women left a romantic trace of admiration and example. The real beginning of the women's movement in Persia must be considered the Persian revolution of 1906-9. Only from that time on, a Persian woman, of course more or less conscious and educated, begins to take an interest in political issues and bring all possible help in the struggle for new ideas. The awakening of women in Persia during these years was greatly facilitated by the tremendous growth of the Persian press, for the first time in its pages talking about the need to emancipate the Persian and involve her in the general cycle of life. Only from that time on did they begin to discuss the need for some kind of education for a Persian girl. Some radical newspapers speak about the categorical implantation of literacy among Persian women, etc. The ideological influence of the Transcaucasian revolutionaries, who took a large part in the first Persian revolution, also contributed to the awakening of the self-consciousness of the Persian woman. The strength of the liberation ideas brought from the Transcaucasus was generally reflected in the fate of the women's movement in Persia. Of course, the role of the Persian woman in the revolution of 1906-9 was, for obvious reasons, not very noticeable and significant. Nevertheless, some of them took an active part and often defended freedom with weapons in their hands. Persian women especially distinguished themselves during the heroic defense, the revolutionary Tabriz against the Shah's troops. There was even created a special women's battalion that fought in the same ranks with men. In the revolutionary troops, single women, dressed in men's suits, often took part in battles and skirmishes and, according to eyewitnesses, showed remarkable courage and loyalty to duty. After the proclamation of the constitution, the women's movement in Persia began to take on more organized forms. This is how a women's nationalist club is organized in Tehran, in which; a fair number of women participate, of course, from the privileged classes. At the meetings of this club, various topical issues of current politics are discussed, patriotic resolutions are passed against the interference of foreign powers in Persian affairs, etc. This time is characterized by some awakening of the harem woman, and the introduction into her musty atmosphere of gossip and love intrigues, new interests, ideas and views. Colossal ignorance even among women of the privileged classes, a narrow circle of spreading new ideas regarding the emancipation and liberation of women, made the women's movement in Persia a phenomenon of not a mass order. Only in recent years, due to the development of secular education in Persia, the percentage of women participating in the women's movement has slightly increased. The first educational institution in Persia, in which the daughters of aristocrats and the big commercial bourgeoisie studied, was the American women's school in Tehran. From here came a few cadres of women intellectuals who are at the head of the modern women's movement. What is the current position of the women's movement in Persia? As we have already indicated, the Persian women's movement is purely cultural in nature. Existing women's organizations in Tehran and other major cities have a direct goal of promoting education among women. The involvement of Persian female workers and peasant women in the work of women's organizations and circles is extremely weak. Rather, almost no work is being done in this direction. One of the largest women's organizations is the Women's Patriotic League in Tehran, which recruits its members from the Persian female intelligentsia and the wives of wealthy Persians. It is headed by the famous female activist Mer-Banu, a pupil of the American girls' school. Mer-Banu, remains a teacher there and devotes his whole life to the liberation of a Persian woman. In a conversation with an American journalist, Mer-Banu defined the league's work as follows: “We, says Mer-Banu, devote all our attention to the widespread popularization of women's education. Only with the creation of the necessary cadres of educated women can one think of further more energetic steps. I do not dream, Mer-Banu said further, about such things as removing the veil, etc. " From the above words of Mer-Banu, one can understand the nature of the women's movement and its leaders. The program of the women's patriotic league does not include an "attack on the Koran" and any abrupt steps that could offend anyone. The League is too ceremonious about religion, too afraid of angering the Persian clergy to be able to achieve any significant results. The only issue in which she shows some energy is the legal side of divorce. According to Persian law, a husband can divorce at any moment and send his wife away from him. On this basis, real tragedies are often played out, ending in frequent suicides of poor women who are inhumanely thrown into the streets. The woman, on her part, does not have the slightest right and opportunity to divorce her husband, even if he beats her, mocks her, etc. The Women's Patriotic League seeks to change the form of divorce in the direction of minimally protecting the interests of a woman and giving the act of divorce a reciprocity character. The league organizes meetings on these topics, invites radical speakers, etc. The special women's newspapers published in Tehran are also of some importance. In 1921, the rather popular magazine "Woman's World" was published, which was soon closed by the government. Then the newspaper "Lisan-e-Zenan" (Language of a Woman) began to exist, published before their time. The Persian women's press suffers from the common shortcomings of the Persian women's movement, namely a lack of activity, a vague platform and a narrow circle of readers recruited exclusively from the privileged classes. This is almost all the little that is being done to free the Persian woman by the official women's movement. The new Pahlavi dynasty did little to change the position of the Persian woman. The policy of Reza Shah in the women's question, as in other areas, suffers from ambiguity, unexpected leaps towards spiritual obscurantism, etc. The women's question can serve as an excellent example of the duplicity of the modern Persian regime. On the one hand, there has been a recent development of women's education, the opening of special women's schools, etc .; on the other hand, under the influence of the clergy, a decree was issued prohibiting women from walking on the same sidewalk with men: for women in some cities even special sidewalks have been created, and the transition from one sidewalk to another is punishable by a fine. This also includes the persecution in Persia of "Bahaism," a religious teaching that is tolerant and progressive towards women. In general, it must be said that the very fact of the restoration of the monarchy in Persia excludes the possibility of effective and radical reforms in general, and in particular in the field of the emancipation of the Persian woman. The October Revolution could not pass without leaving a trace for the cause of the emancipation of the Persian woman. The revolutionary movement that took place in Persia after October, to a large extent contributed to the propaganda of the slogans of women's liberation, It is also necessary to note the significant role of numerous Persian women who were educated in Soviet Russia and returning to their homeland, in drawing the most conscientious Persian workers and peasant women into work. The still completely dark and downtrodden Persian toilers are beginning to show very weak, but still signs of life. Economic processes also contribute to this. The proletarianization of the peasantry, the rise in the cost of living, etc., make the Persian peasant woman think, and make tangible changes in her psychology. In this sense, a letter from a Persian female worker published in a Tehran newspaper is interesting. In this letter to male readers, she writes: “You have never been touched by the unfortunate, truly regrettable position of the Persian woman. I am sure that if you suddenly regained your sight and looked into the horrifying pages of a woman's fate, if you saw all the torments, insults, insults we endure from our masters and about grief from our husbands, if you felt burning the tears we shed, then you would agree with our demands. If you saw a helpless unfortunate woman, lonely, without an intercessor, a woman walled up from all sides — you would not have tolerated a single minute, you would remove the veil of violence that envelops her soul, you would make her free. Enough to keep a woman in shame and humiliation! " This is what a woman worker writes. True, there are still few such votes among working women. The conditions of darkness, illiteracy and slave bondage are doing their job. True, the women's movement in Persia is still a cultural attempt of a thin layer of the urban intelligentsia. Newer, however, there is a certain shift in the mood and psychology of the Persian toiler. The shift is very significant, bearing in itself the possibilities of real emancipation of the Persian woman. The magnificent example of the liberated woman of the Soviet Transcaucasia will be of great importance for the success of the women's movement in Persia. The great work done by the Soviet government in the emancipation of women of the eastern nations and equalizing them in rights with men will play a crucial role in giving the Persian women's movement the lack of activity and scope. A free woman of Soviet Azerbaijan is a guarantee of genuine emancipation of a Persian woman from centuries of slavery and humiliation.