3. Modern zyryanka
When we spoke above about the freedom enjoyed by the Zyrian woman in the family and society, it was necessary, of course, to emphasize the very relative nature of this freedom. The latter, mainly, manifests itself in the personal relationships of a woman, unfolding in the circle and within the family. Until the woman is completely emancipated, there is still a "huge distance" from here. The main whales of women's inequality, still sanctified by legal norms and public opinion even in "cultural" Europe, not to mention tsarist Russia, are, of course, the economic insecurity of a woman who is materially dependent on men, and the exclusion of women from broad social work. pre-conditioned by the worse, in comparison with the male, female education. Since one of the greatest achievements of our great revolution is precisely the declaration of women's full rights, and since work among the women of the Union comes up against the need to overcome the inertia and inertia of millennial traditions that fetter women's labor and women's initiative, the tasks set by the revolution cannot be considered solved until the final approval in everyday life and in the public consciousness of the complete economic independence of women's labor and the need for a woman's political and educational education, which allows her to take real participation in public life on an equal basis with a man. for its emancipation and the presence of significant obstacles standing in this way. Among these obstacles, one should first of all note the rather active opposition of the male half of the population, especially its kulak elite. If sometimes the matter is limited to only passive an attitude that often takes on the character of a mockery (“where do we have a woman's mind to live”, “what can a woman understand in public affairs”), one can also note a number of cases when the question of women's participation, for example, in elected bodies, took acute forms. In Kaigorodok, for example, men demanded that women leave the electoral meeting, threatening to leave themselves otherwise. It must be said, however, that such phenomena were relatively rare, and as a result of long and persistent work of an agitational and political propaganda nature, they can be considered almost obsolete. But if active resistance on the part of the male population can be considered relatively not very dangerous, there is its passivity, paralyzing the energy of individual workers or women workers in the region and spreading its pernicious influence in some cases even on the psychology of the weakest and morally unstable party elements But not to mention the resistance of the male half of the population, the workers of the women's movement in the region have to deal with the inertia of women themselves. A number of cases have been registered when women nominated women nominated by women at election meetings to village councils and district councils failed. Meanwhile, where women were organized (for example, in Derevyansk), it was possible to get women candidates, although they were at the bottom of the list. It is interesting to note that in this case the male part of the population also responded very conciliatoryly to the election (“Anna is a sensible woman, let her be on the council”). Enormous difficulties also stand in the way of the correct organization of women's activity. The most active, of course, is the proletarian part of the female population, from among whom the most energetic women activists are recruited. Planned work activities among women are concentrated, as elsewhere in the USSR, mainly around the women's departments of the Communist Party and their local apparatuses. Where they do not exist, the role of communist cells or cells of the Komsomol is highlighted, which also independently carries out a lot of work among female youth. In addition, work among women in the field very often takes place in cooperatives, at schools, self-help committees and other public organizations. Turning to the question of the work of the women's department, it should be noted the difficulties it experiences in relation to the acute lack of qualified workers who are well acquainted with local conditions. ... The result of this deficiency is a rather strong turnover of personnel, which inhibits the scope and proper pace of work. In order to overcome this deficiency, the regional party school accepts a significant (up to 35%) percentage of women who are specially assigned to lead work activities among women. The second and also a very large obstacle is the lack of roads and sparsely populated areas, which require a large cadre of workers in view of the fact that villages, as we have noted, lie tens and even hundreds of kilometers from each other. Nevertheless, these serious objective obstacles were overcome both by the spontaneous urge of the female masses to fight for a better future, and by the exclusive energy of individual pioneers, and mainly pioneers of the women's movement, and the region The ny conference of peasant women, held on September 20, 1926, could already state the unconditional success of the work and its unswerving desire to develop in depth and breadth. Here are the numbers to prove it. For three years - 1924, 1925 and 1926 - the number of delegates consistently gave - 586, 1380 and 2058 people, the number of meetings - 18, 44 and 70. Women's promotion, internship during the same years is expressed in 80, 195 and 613 people. Yasel — 16, 31 and 53. These, as well as other figures, clearly testify to the tremendous shift that has taken place in the consciousness of the female population in the region and is the result of that grandiose reorganization of life on a new basis, which the October Revolution brought with it. We have already noted above that the main tasks of work among women are, firstly, political and educational activities, which determine the everyday emancipation of women and her participation in social construction, and measures for economic support, which first put a real foundation underneath. The main apparatus of the women's department serving the first part of the task is the corps of delegates. The latter represent the most active part of the female population, and, receiving the necessary explanations and guiding instructions at delegate meetings, they spread the seeds of a new public and calls for action in the most deaf cells. The heads of these delegate apparatus in the localities are the volost organizers, which are currently available. almost all over the region, and meetings are held at communal and Komsomol cells, where there are no party organizations (attendance is about 70%). In addition to the delegate corps, work on the political and educational education of the Zyryan woman is carried out at special courses held in the regional and district centers. In order to note the impact of these courses, we emphasize the following characteristic fact. After listening to the Izhma courses, one delegate not only entered the party, but also dragged her husband into it, having managed to convince and re-educate him. The centers of educational programs are working, although it should be noted that the percentage of graduates who graduate from studies is relatively weak. In the appendix, we will provide an overview of the real achievements of this tremendous political education work carried out by the County Women's Department and digitally indicate the participation of women in public activities. For now, we note that the total% of girls in grade I and II schools is 25%, i.e. almost twice the pre-revolutionary norm of female education. On the issue of ensuring the economic conditions in the market, the women's department should note the desire to mechanize women's labor and thus free a woman from the extra burden that does not allow her to devote enough time to real participation in public life. In this regard, one should welcome the energy of the women workers in the distribution of flax crumbs in the field, for the labor of processing flax, which has become very widespread in the region, the work entirely on the woman is greatly facilitated. In exactly the same way, it is necessary to highlight the transition to the management of the women's department of a whole series of women's artels, spontaneously organized, but due to the lack of proper leadership, who fell into disarray. In artels, consisting almost exclusively of the poor peasant element, there are over 130 handicrafts working on orders from Gostorg, Khleboprodukt and cooperation and engaged in the production of malitsa, pim and. etc. and processing of skins. Although their development is still insignificant (the Gamsk artel, for example, in 1926 worked out for 83 rubles. 65 k., Or 3 rubles. 80 k. On average for a member), but the proper leadership, and from 1926 it passed to the women's department - under the available conditions, it will give up to 110 rubles. earnings per member, which represents a significant local income. The Zhenotdel is also conducting intensive campaigning work for the cooperation of women, which will undoubtedly give, and even give already, tangible results in the Zyryanka's home budget, and takes an active part in the work of the health department, which is opening more and more nurseries and playgrounds. The latter, of course, is of tremendous importance not only in relation to the hygienic and sanitary care of the child, but also allows the mother to save the necessary time to participate in public work. Throughout Sysolsky uezd, circles of intercessors were organized, protecting the interests of the female labor population. Although this movement has not yet spread throughout the region, a start has already been made. All over the region, women take part in the work of the people's courts as jurors. The total number (550 people, or 20%) still far from corresponds to the actual ratio between men's and women's cases in the courts. However, if we take into account that these are the first experiments and that the consciousness of their social rights, duties and opportunities very slowly penetrates the consciousness of the female population, obscured by the old way of life and pre-revolutionary and lawlessness - this must be recognized as a great achievement. We have at our disposal a number of figures and facts illustrating the results of the tremendous work done to educate the working zyryanka. Maybe there were flaws in this work. Maybe some of them are still there. It is impossible not to note the almost complete absence of work among the Samoyed women, heavily exploited by the Zyryan kulaks. Above we indicated a number of objective reasons standing in the way of the emancipation of women and inherited mainly from the bad memory of tsarist Russia. But "facts are stubborn things," Lenin said. And these facts are eloquent. (See Appendix.) In conclusion, let us point out the most pressing problems currently facing the women's movement and the women's department organizing it. This is, firstly, the task of intensified struggle against the Zyryan kulaks, in particular, intensified work among the Samoyed women, who are mercilessly exploited by them. Secondly, it is the need to intensify anti-religious propaganda and the struggle against the church, which is still very strong in the region, especially where there are stubborn Old Believer deviations and where even young people fall under its influence. Thirdly, this is the strengthening of work in the artels and the establishment of the correct organization of their management, further collectivization of the labor of farm laborers and their involvement in trade union work. And finally, fourthly, it is active assistance to the economic growth of the region, its industrialization and the construction of railways, which should lead to a powerful economic prosperity, in particular, the proper exploitation of forest resources, and certainly not for the predators of British capitalism and its white-bandit henchmen, but for the working population of the region, which is part of the great family of the free proletarian association of the allied peoples.