3. New in the life of the natives
Of course, the organs of Soviet power had to face colossal difficulties in restructuring the social order in this deaf and wild country. Lack of: decent means of communication, a harsh climate, nomadic life, general illiteracy, dirt, superstition, all this makes the task of renewing the region extremely difficult. However, in a short period of time there have already been a number of major achievements in this area. After the elimination of the White Guards, provincial and district bodies of Soviet power were created, and the natives were also involved in their work. First of all, they started to work in the most important areas here in the field of public education and health. In the more cultured regions of the province there are already up to 45 schools, mostly of course primary, a kindergarten, a library, and several reading rooms. The network of medical institutions has been expanded to the extent possible and veterinary care has been strengthened. Of course, all these measures are far from sufficient, but one has to reckon with enormous difficulties in terms of the selection of appropriate workers, lack of funds, etc. It is very interesting to note that the revolution and the work of the organs of Soviet power caused great shifts among the 'nomadic' indigenous tribes. Small hunting tribes, which are at a very low level of economic and social development, are now gradually passing before our eyes to new, incomparably higher forms of life. First of all, a kind of class stratification begins here. The tribal chiefs and princes, on whom the tsarist administration previously relied, entrusting them with the collection of yasak, take a hostile position in relation to new trends. All these native aristocrats and rich people, who own vast herds of reindeer of several thousand heads, who use the labor of farm laborers and who keep the whole tribe in fear, strive to preserve their former privileges and power. They are joined by shamans for whom the most dangerous is the spread of literacy and enlightenment, which fundamentally undermines their importance and authority. On the other hand, the middle peasants, who have about a hundred deer and completely impoverished natives, forced to hire themselves as laborers, have a good attitude towards the new government and more and more openly oppose their elite. Power from the princelings and foremen, appointed by the tsarist authorities, passes to the tribal councils elected by the tribe (and giving up all its affairs. The tribal councils keep in touch with the provincial and district authorities of the Soviet government and receive instructions and instructions from them. They discuss issues of improving hunting conditions , on reserves for endangered valuable animals, on the supply of food to them, etc. Some shifts) are also observed among native women: March 8, 1925 In the city of Uellen, a meeting of Chukchi women was organized, dedicated to the issues of hygiene, raising children and the women's movement in The USSR, which was quite successful. In 1926, we see that about 7% of native women participate in the elections to the birth councils. Recently, we have seen the development of consumer cooperation in the Region; along with this, the authorities are striving to streamline the fur and fish business in order to put an end to the predation of foreign capitalists forever. The newly created state organization Okhotsk-Kamchatka Akts. O-vo "(Okaro), which includes all the large economic organizations of the Far East, has organized more than 30 trading posts that buy furs, on fair and favorable terms for the natives, supplying them with the goods and food they need. In addition, the coast guard has been strengthened, preventing the penetration of foreign buyers and smugglers! Achievements of course are huge, especially if you take into account the difficult situation in which the Soviets have to work, even those who do not have the ability to maintain regular contact with the nomadic encampment of the endless tundra. The Committee for Assistance to Small Nations of the North under the All-Russian Central Executive Committee plays an unusually important role in promoting the progress of these peoples. Carefully studying the economy and the way of life of the natives, the Committee, as far as possible, is taking a number of measures to improve their living conditions, but what do all these achievements mean in comparison with the gigantic task that we face. To wrest from the darkness of the filth, the primitive system, diseases, several thousand people, abandoned in the most remote and remote outskirts of our Union, to attach them to Soviet culture, to those forms of life that are already taking root in the Russian countryside - this is not an easy task. Can we therefore talk about a change in the position of a native woman in the family and everyday life, about new forms of marriage, about women's education? Of course not. What does a few years mean where decades are needed? But in any case, the next and inevitable for-I 'ZO "giving the party and the authorities to strengthen the work and help the native woman in what is more accessible and possible. First of all, it is to improve the health of the region, pay attention to sanitary welfare. The fight against syphilis is the most important task Syphilis is the most terrible scourge of the natives. Any measures for the protection of Maternity; if in the more cultured part of the region something is being done in this direction, then the nomadic settlements of its northern part - the Koryaks and the Chukchi - are left to their fate. natives. Only by resolving these most pressing, fundamental failures, one can hope for success in transforming a downtrodden native slave into a real person, into a full-fledged citizen. To do this, you need to save a woman of nomadic tribes from an unbearable economic role for her, give her the opportunity to straighten her back and live in human conditions. 3. Indigenous congress The tasks in relation to the coastal Chukchi should be especially noted. We have already said that this is a more cultural group, akin to the American Eskimos, and maintains a connection with America. The consequence of this is some of their gravitation towards American culture, which is enhanced by the marriages and connections of Americans with Chukchi women. We should oppose our gravitation to this; cultural endeavors to make it clear to the Chukchi that they have a more loyal and more disinterested friend and leader. A huge cultural role in this sense is played by the Northern Rabfak, opened in Leningrad at the Institute of Living Eastern Languages, created by the same Committee of the North. The youth of almost all our outlying northern peoples receive education here; But unfortunately, it is precisely those peoples to whom this work is devoted that are very poorly represented at the workers' faculty. The workers' faculty has only 1 Kamchadalka and 1 Chukchi. This Kamchadalka belongs to the most Russified urban part of this tribe. Representatives of the true nomadic tribes of the Region, the most backward and most in need of enlightenment, are almost absent. There are absolutely no Koryaks, either stray or sedentary, and only one Chukchi. This Chukchi, named Tevlyanto, hails from the Anadyr region, the shaman's grandson, belongs to the reindeer nomadic group. Despite the opposition of the imperious grandfather, Tevlyanto still achieved his goal: he left, got to Leningrad and entered the workers' school. He makes great strides in his studies, and he is described as a very capable, receptive and hard-working youth. This, at first glance, an insignificant fact, in fact, is of great importance. If the Chukchi people have at least one educated person, a person who has adopted the main features of Soviet culture and at the same time is energetic and loves his country and his people, then this is already a guarantee of success in the difficult task of introducing savage nomads to the modern It is extremely difficult for such young men to achieve their goals and break out to a new life. To do this, one must overcome the stubborn resistance of their relatives, without fear of incurring their anger and enmity. And then there are many difficulties: having traveled a long way through a foreign country, not knowing language, not having enough money, not having seen the railroad before, to get straight into a big city, that is, in other words, to transfer from an almost prehistoric era to the 20th century — this is certainly not an easy matter. to note the sensitive and careful attitude of the Soviet authorities to the young growth thirsty for knowledge.For illustration, we present an excerpt from the letter that the Anadyr Revolutionary Committee issued to Tevlyanto: “The submitter of this letter— (Chukchi Tevlyanto from Anadyr, on assignment at the suggestion of the Kamchatka Okrrevkom for; receiving education in the schools of Soviet Russia, so that, after a few years have returned to their homeland, share the knowledge gained with their relatives. His whole life was spent on the inhospitable harsh tundra. The country where he is going is not like his Anadyr. The Revolutionary Committee fears that it will have to endure hardships more than once and often, due to its ignorance of the Russian language, find itself in a desperate situation. In addition, a lot of trouble can turn out for him because of the peculiarities of his mental disposition: a kind of pride and excessive impressionability. Those who happen to read this letter, we are deeply requested to you. Provide Tevlyanto with possible assistance when he calls you "in Need." Further, in the letter they ask, if necessary, to telegraph about Tevlyanto directly to the Revolutionary Committee. ”In addition to the Leningrad workers' faculty, the natives of the Territory are given places in educational institutions of Khabarovsk and Vladivostok. Finally, now a large cult base is being organized in the port of Wellen (in Chukotka), especially to serve the Chukchi. Its task is to spread literacy among the coastal and reindeer natives, to explain to them the essence and nature of the Soviet system and to provide them with medical assistance. All these are still the first shoots of a new one. The time is still far away when illiteracy will be eliminated among the nomads of the Territory, when native women will be taught. But those loners from the nomadic youth who study in the Soviet school, they will return home and begin a stubborn struggle against the nomadic way of life, with superstitions, with dirt, syphilis, for the involvement of the natives in the construction business socialism, for a new way of life, in which an emancipated native