3. A woman of Georgia under Soviet rule
The Sovietization of Georgia heralds a new era for a Georgian woman in her emancipation from the oppression of the old way of life and age-old traditions. We have seen that the natural conditions of some parts of Georgia pose huge, difficult-to-overcome obstacles to the expansion of schools, the creation of cooperative organizations, and so on. We saw that the main obstacle in these remote corners of Georgia is the complete absence of roads. And yet, much has already been done over the years of the existence of Soviet power. The railway line Mingrelia-Guria was built; the communication with Khevsureti has been significantly improved, a wheel road to Svan-etiya is being built. What has been done to date is only the beginning, the first milestones that outline the forward movement of culture to the abandoned, hitherto cut off from the whole world corners, where, as we see, life is at a difficult to define cultural level. And in-s-e, what has been done, yielded its results, yielded results that we will try to summarize. The October Revolution, which made great shifts in all corners of the USSR, to a certain extent also affected the life of the Khevsurs , and if we take into account the geographical position of Khevsureti, its isolation, lack of roads, etc., it will become clear that in this harsh country, lost in the deep gorges of the Main Caucasian ridge, a tremendous amount of work needs to be done in order for that archaic life in which • live! The Khevsurs, to bring them closer to the level of our culture, to get rid of the features of that barbaric way of life, in which this peculiar, free people still lives. First of all, it is necessary to make every effort to get rid of the barbaric practice of samrevlo, which is destructive on the health of women, blood feud and other features of archaic life. In Shatila, we had to hear from the Khevsurs that they understand the harm of samrevlo, but they themselves do not dare to abandon this custom. Naturally, the most reliable means in the fight against the indicated ugly features of Khevsurian life is school. Unfortunately, until now, there are no schools in Khevsureti. According to the information we received from Dushetskopo Narobra: - in the near future, it is planned to open six schools of the 1st stage. All these schools promise to build, the Khevsurs themselves, the funds needed to pay the teachers' salaries will be allocated by the Department of Public Education. Unfortunately, the teaching staff is weak, often with a lower education. Last season, three educational programs worked in Khevsureti, which allowed about 100 people to pass. There is no medical help; two medical centers are planned: in Shatila and in Arkhbti. There are currently four schools in Pshavia. We visited one of these schools, in Shuapho. The school building consists of two rooms; the one in which the classes are taking place is six steps long and five wide, dark, dirty; there are no benches, children learn while sitting on boards laid directly on the floor. There are 27 boys studying here. The room next door is larger, cleaner, brighter; When we asked why classes were not held in this room, we were told that attempts were made to transfer the students here, but the boys refused to move, since this room is considered unclean due to the fact that it played the role of “barefoot.” In 1927-28. six more schools are expected to open. The age of students is usually from 12 to 18 years old, in some cases up to 22-23 years old. The teaching takes place from October to March. In Pshavia there is a reading room with a radio installation. Last season, there were two libkez who allowed 70 people to pass. In Pshavia, as already mentioned, there is a noticeable shift towards the liberation of women from the humiliating and harmful custom of isolating themselves in the "barefoot". During childbirth, in severe cases, women begin to gradually seek help from a midwife; the attentive attitude, facilitating the patient's situation, gives its results and the trust of the pshavok in the selfless representatives of medicine is growing and gaining strength, and lately, as we have been told, pshaviks are more and more willing to seek help. In Svaneti, the work of the Soviet government influenced significantly more tangible forms. Recently, the Svans give the impression of people awakened from centuries of hibernation. Despite their backwardness, isolation from the cultural world, the Svans have complete confidence in everything new, which should radically transform their entire life. Eagerly and with complete confidence they go for help to hospitals, of which there are currently two open in Svaneti (in addition, there are also outpatient clinics;) with doctors, midwives, and paramedics, a pharmacy and a dental office x); this trust is especially promoted by the selfless work of doctors, who are attentive and patient with everyone who comes for help. Successful operations that free the Svans from goiter, which, as indicated, is extremely common in Svaneti, also contributes to the confidence that is gradually growing among the population in medical care. Svan youth, realizing that it is impossible to live in the old way, literally thirsts for enlightenment. Recently, a number of schools (4-year-olds) have been opened in Svanetian villages; significant work for the opening of the seven-year plan. Education in schools is conducted in Georgian. A significant number of Svan youth study in Tiflis and Kutaisi secondary and higher educational institutions. Unfortunately, the government does not have sufficient funds to fully meet this growing need for literacy and build a sufficient number of schools in Svaneti itself ... In addition, on the part of the Svan youth, there is a definite desire to join the Komsomol. However, in this respect, too, it does not meet with sufficient support, since there is not a sufficient number of relevant leaders. The biggest evil, the most significant brake on raising the cultural level in THIS country is off-road. A country cut off from the whole world for eight months a year naturally cannot join culture in the absence of wheeled roads, that is, constant and reliable communication with the outside world. Carrying out the 'wheel track, which was carried out in the near future, must be considered the greatest achievement and great merit of the Soviet power. At present, there are two clubs in Adjarastan — one in Batum, the other in Kobuleti. Women's clubs in Adjarian are the only means of raising the cultural level of Adjarian women. At these clubs, in addition to the school for the eradication of illiteracy, cutting and sewing, loud reading, and so on. sections were organized - legal, medical and children's; the legal one prepares the adjarok-legal protestors, and the medical one, in addition to medical care and the dispensing of medicines, is working on sanitary and hygienic education. The attendance of the clubs is increasing more and more, therefore, the number of Ajar women who are involved in social and cultural work in one of the most backward corners of Georgia, inhabited by Mohammedan Georgians, is constantly growing. Thus, o-br-aom, we see that now certain prerequisites for improving the situation of the Georgian mountain woman, we also see that the main obstacles to the more rapid advancement of culture in the most remote corners of Georgia are: impassability, tenacious archaic life and, finally, the absence of cultural workers from their own environment, who would be fully trusted population; we have seen that, for example, in Svaneti, teaching has to be conducted in Georgian, while the Svans have their own language. Turning to an overview of the achievements on the cultural front of the whole of Georgia, it should be said that with the advent of Soviet power, it has changed dramatically for the better. primarily the political position of women. The growth of political consciousness was especially affected by the participation of a Georgian woman in the current re-election to the councils: the percentage of female voters who came to exercise their right increased to 35.5 against 20.9 "/ o last year." 1.940 women were elected to the Councils, which is 8.2 v / o, (last year, 1.607 women or 8.1 v / 0 were elected). A total of 2.680 women were elected to local government bodies. Female Communists of the CPSU (b) of Georgia on May 1, 1926 it was 1.511; of these, 718 members and 739 candidates. As a result of the re-election of delegates in 25/26, 325 delegate points were organized, uniting 9.679 delegates; of them: peasant women — 65 o / o, female workers — 9.03 o / o, office workers — 6.37 o / o, housewives — 14.7 o / o, unaccounted-for — 4.9 o / o, social workers — 10.628 people. At present, under the Ts. O. there has been created an institute of interns-promoted women workers and peasant women, who, having undergone a certain training, will be transferred to independent work. Work is underway among the girls of Georgia — the connection with the Central Committee of the LKSMG has been formalized and strengthened. As of January 1, 25, there were 1,840 girls in the Komsomol of Georgia, out of a total of 24,874 or 7.4 v / v. Labor conditions have also changed for the better; thanks to the land reform, the growth of cooperation, the emergence of new branches of labor, etc., the economic prerequisites appeared for the development of the national economy of Georgia. There are 146,553 trade union members throughout Georgia; of this number of women, 27.357 or 18.1%. 302 women are members of the cross committees, 4.3.95 in cooperatives; in other organizations of women members, 4.991. Artels - 31; they have 53 women. Vocational schools - 32; women in them - 396. Fig. 2. A newly opened silk-winding factory in Telava (Georgia). In 25-26, 734 women were involved in factory schools. The number of consultations is 13. Through the departments for the protection of mothers and infants under the People's Commissariat of Health, work is being carried out to protect mothers and infants. Special Commission Cargo. CEC for the International Day of Women Workers on March 8 this year. issued a number of resolutions: the People's Commissariat for Health was proposed to allocate from the republican medical background: yes, the insured the necessary amount to open nurseries in Kutanoi, Ozurgeti and Telava; The People's Commissariat of Agriculture was proposed to organize a women's collective of village-households in the Tiflis district. artels, supplying it with the necessary seeds and agricultural. tools. At the same time, the need to organize women's collectives in the counties was recognized; for this purpose, the People's Commissariat of Agriculture was asked to find land plots from the stock lands. The People's Commissariat of Labor (it is prescribed! to lead a struggle against the displacement of female labor in  enterprises and institutions, increase the armor of adolescent girls, increase the number of women in collectives, increase the percentage of women sent by the labor exchange to work, organize groups of unemployed women and courses to improve the qualifications of female labor; in addition, to increase the number of women receiving benefits, to take measures to improve the work of women in enterprises and to dismiss the commission for improving the labor and living conditions of women workers at Georgia. The Central Election Commission, necessary for the opening of the dyeing funds from the fund of labor aid. The People's Commissariat of Education was asked to release sewing machines for vocational schools in Dusheti, Ozurgeti and Lechkhum. To expand the work of the kindergarten, at the Adjarok club in Batum, give one teacher and to equip ten women's corners in Georgia to release literature and stationery. Turning to the publishing business, it should be noted that currently in Georgia the magazine "Worker" (formerly. "Chveni Gza") and a number of books were published devoted to the study of the women's issue and the women's movement, which should serve as material both for the work of delegate meetings and for cell organizers of women. This is, in general terms, the life of a Georgian woman in the past and present. what has been said, it should be emphasized once again that the life of a Georgian city dweller is almost no different from the life of a city dweller in any part of our Union; As for the life of a Georgian peasant woman in Georgia proper, for a number of the reasons listed above, it hardly differs from the life of a Russian peasant woman. Finally, the life of a Georgian mountain woman, lost in the slums of gorges and 'inaccessible mountains', is still the initial stages of human culture ... It is precisely here that the attention of the Soviet government and the leaders of the women's movement in Georgia should be directed mainly.