3. Legal, cultural and economic achievements of the Circassian woman under Soviet rule
If the Russian worker and peasant languished under the yoke of the capitalists, landlords and the tsar, then the Circassian peasant endured a double oppression; he was oppressed as a peasant — it was class oppression; he was also oppressed along the national line — it was a great power oppression. Simultaneously with the development of the national policy of the Soviet government, aimed at the emancipation of small nationalities inhabiting our republics and regions, the task of emancipating the Circassian toiler arose. 1) The appeal of the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR on February 13, 1925 to the peoples inhabiting the national republics and regions of the Soviet East on the rights of working women in the Soviet East and the need to combat all types of their enslavement in the field of economic and family life; 2) The draft resolution of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee and the Council of People's Commissars of the RSFSR on supplementing the Criminal Code of the RSFSR with a new Chapter X on crimes constituting remnants of family life, submitted by the Presidium of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee for consideration of the II Session of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee of the 13th convocation and sent out preliminarily to the places for broad discussion. The above acts contain the confirmation of the inalienable fundamental rights of working women of the East and extends completely also to the Circassian woman, we cite it in full: “The Great October Revolution destroyed the power of the tsar, capitalists and beys and liberated the oppressed peoples of the Soviet East from centuries-old national oppression. The peasant power cleared the way for fraternal cooperation of peoples and united them into the voluntary Union of the SSR. Following the behests of the great leader and friend of the oppressed peoples, Lenin, the Soviet government set itself the task of raising the most enslaved part of the working population - the many millions of toilers of the East and attracting them to building but The Republic of Soviets seven years ago, in the days of the October Revolution, proclaimed the complete and all-round emancipation of women. Slowly but steadily, the Workers 'and Peasants' Government in recent years has achieved certain practical measures to achieve the actual equality of women. The liberating influence of the revolution has already affected the main the mass of the female masses of the Eastern peoples and set before millions of working people the task of promoting and supporting the all-round emancipation of women. However, everyday and religious prejudices (customary law, adat, sharia), enslaving the female half of the peoples of the East with special force, made it difficult and difficult to emancipate the worker of the East. the release of an Eastern woman, it is necessary to involve the broad masses of the peoples of the East in this matter. Therefore, the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR considers it necessary to draw the attention of the entire population of the national republics and autonomous regions to the fact that o - until now, Uzbek and Turk, Kyrgyz and Kalmyk, Yakut, Buryat and other women of the Soviet East have not freed themselves from age-old oppression based on old customs and have not been duly drawn into the ranks of the persecutors of the Soviet state. The Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR calls on the working people of all nationalities of the Soviet East to unswervingly monitor the implementation of all laws protecting the rights of women, to fight all forms of enslavement of her and to take all measures to attract the workers of the East to participate in public and political life, at all stages of state work. oppressed woman of the East in her struggle for liberation for her complete emancipation in the field of economic, legal and family life, the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR considers it necessary to remind and clarify again those rights of the toiler of the East, which were proclaimed in the first days of the great October revolution and found their expression in further Soviet legislation. 1) According to the Constitution of the USSR, a woman of the East enjoys the right to elect and be elected to all bodies of Soviet power, not excluding the highest state institutions. A working woman must exercise this right, cast her vote in elections to councils and be an active member of all organizations to which she is elected. 2) A woman of the East enjoys, on an equal basis with a man, all civil rights and bears the duties established by the Civil Code. She is given the freedom to choose occupations and professions, acquire and alienate property and enter into obligations allowed by law. 3) The law establishes severe punishments for all persons, not excluding the next of kin: 'which force a woman to marry against her will, or before she reaches the legal age. Equally, the law punishes the payment of kalym, the kidnapping of a woman to marry her, and polygamy — these are remnants of the age-old oppression of women that stand in the way of her cultural and political development. 4) Having put an end to the bourgeois division of children into legal and illegal, Soviet the power ensures their complete equality and gives the woman the right to demand from the father of the children she has born to them materially, regardless of whether these children are born in a registered or unregistered marriage. At the same time, striving to come to the aid of the toiler of the East in her care for children and to take measures to protect the health of the mother, the Soviet government calls on the population of the national republics and regions to organize new and support existing homes for mothers and children, nurseries, orphanages, colonies, obstetric centers, etc., providing them with comprehensive assistance and assistance from outside of all state bodies. By creating a network of schools and educational institutions that work in their native In the language, the Soviet government calls on the indigenous population of the national republics and regions to educate young people in the spirit of combating domestic prejudices that enslave women and to attract girls and girls, on an equal basis with male youth, to general and professional schools, clubs and other educational institutions as well as to pioneer and youth organizations. Recognizing that the realization of the full emancipation of a woman is achievable only through her gaining an independent economic position, the Soviet government calls on local public organizations to intensify efforts to involve women in production artels and local industry enterprises. Soviet government agencies, with the support of the entire conscious population, should help hard worker to become an active member of councils and executive committees, professional and cooperative organizations, self-help committees and other public organizations and get the opportunity, as a judge, lay judge, member of the college of defenders, or kurora, to take part in resolving issues related to the legal status of women. The Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR invites all Soviet bodies to widely inform the working women of the national republics and regions about the rights granted to them by the October Revolution and ways to combat violators of these rights established by Soviet law This resolution must be translated into the languages ​​of the peoples of the Soviet East, read at meetings of all village, aul, ulus and city councils, as well as at congresses and conferences, and posted in a conspicuous place in the buildings of all executive committees, Soviet institutions, schools and higher educational institutions ". One of the types of struggle of the Soviet power for the emancipation of the Circassian woman is the struggle against ancient customs through criminal punishment. In this regard, the Circassian woman finds full protection in the draft resolution of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee and the Council of People's Commissars of the RSFSR on supplementing the Criminal Code of the RSFSR with a new Chapter X on crimes that constitute the remnants of family life. Of the articles listed in this draft, the following are being put into effect for the Adyghe-Circassian Autonomous Region: “Payment of the bride price (kalym) made by the groom, his parents, relatives or relatives of the bridegroom, relatives or relatives of the bride, money, cattle or other property , or by personal labor - imprisonment or forced labor for a term of one year Ao. Acceptance of the ransom — the same measures and, regardless of the confiscation of the ransom, a fine in the amount of ransom. ”“ Forcing a woman to marry against her will through violence or threats, as well as kidnapping her for the same purpose — imprisonment for up to two years. The rape of the same woman committed in this case entails the measures provided for in 151 or 153 x) Art. Art. of this Code. ”“ Marrying a person who has not reached puberty, or being forced to enter into such a marriage — the measures provided for in Art. 151 of this Code * 2). "" Bigamy or polygamy — forced labor for up to one year or a fine of up to five hundred rubles. " The Soviet government recognized the complete equality of women with men. In no country does a woman enjoy the same rights as she received in the Soviet Union. These are the principal achievements of the Circassian woman in the Soviet Union. But, of course, for the successful implementation of these achievements, one cannot limit oneself to a simple declaration of women's rights. We must not forget that in the conditions of Circassian reality, one has to literally break open the doors of each saklya, sometimes tightly boarded up for a woman by age-old darkness and everyday traditions. In order to achieve the embodiment of new norms in social life and everyday life, or at least to paralyze the most painful manifestations of the old way of life, you need to put in a lot of work and patience, you need a whole cadre of persistent and knowledgeable workers, organized around a special apparatus. Since we are talking about work among women in Adygea, such an apparatus, as elsewhere in the USSR, is the women's department, and its workers are the advanced detachments of women themselves. But I must say that the work of the women's department in Adygea runs up against a number of difficulties that greatly weaken its activity. These difficulties, first of all, include the lack of a cadre of trained workers or women workers who are sufficiently closely connected with the local population and who can be used for active work among the female masses. However, in, during 1925 and 1926. work among women has advanced significantly. If until that time the creation of delegate meetings was thought of as a good wish, then in 1925 this was already implemented and there were over 550 delegates in the region, including 7 Circassian women. In 1926-27, the number of elected delegates reached 760 people, including 811 Circassians. In the same year, for the first time in the form of experience, delegates' meetings were created in the Circassian villages. Delegate meetings, if properly organized, will play the role of an initial school of social work for Circassian women. Methods of conducting educational and educational work among Circassian women have been found by organizing educational centers with training in needlework. Elimination of illiteracy among Circassian women is generally poor. This is due to both the inadequacy of the network of health centers and their overcrowding, and the still small consciousness of the Circassian women themselves. The involvement of Circassian women in health centers is very difficult because the old people forbid them to visit them. Despite this, in 1924 the letter of Fig. 2. Circassian delegates at the 1st regional congress of mountain women of the North Caucasus. 25 new Circassian women were trained. In 1925, there were 12 special centers for Circassian women, in which 180 were trained, and in 1926 there were already 18 such centers with 250 Circassian students. These health centers are remarkable in that the Circassian women who have passed through them feel a great urge to learn and the main contingent of students in the Circassian community school is made up of the past health centers. In addition, the network of other women's institutions is growing, such as: consultations, artels, Circassian houses, nurseries, etc. In quantitative terms, the work has grown significantly, now the main attention is paid to its qualitative strengthening. A special place is occupied by the protection of motherhood and infancy. Until now, there were no institutions of matmlad here at all, and the very idea has not yet penetrated the consciousness of the population. Therefore, work in this area began with consultations, as a form more accessible to the understanding of the population. In 1926-27 in Adygea, there were five consultations for infants and pregnant women. The main objective of these consultations is to combat child mortality and to instill in the population the skills to care for infants. But not everywhere this idea is being put into practice, since the population does not everywhere respond to the call to seek advice on medical issues. In 1925, a cable for a nursery was installed in the oblast, some of which were in the Circassian aul. As far as the idea of ​​a nursery is easily instilled in Russian villages, it turns out to be alien to the Circassian population: first of all, a Circassian woman is chained to her house and children and she does not need to send her children to a nursery; on the other hand, there are a number of conditions that prevent her from parting with children; their unusual food, being together with children of a different nationality, communication of a married Circassian woman with strangers, etc. On the other hand, the strong foundations of the population's conservatism oppose the activities of the women's department aimed at introducing a new way of life. Here is an example to illustrate this sufficiently. In 1925, the regional women's department, together with the regional health department, decided to set up a nursery in one of the villages, and for this purpose workers went there. But, alas, on the part of the population of this aul, especially the “honorable old men”, this good undertaking was met with distrustfulness. 3. A group of educational programs among Circassians at the Adyghe Communist Party School. Even a direct hostile attitude. It took a long time to persuade, explain, and, finally, we somehow collected 5-6 children. To instill more confidence in the nursery, they were placed in the house of one of the most respected Circassians in the village. When the nursery began to function, women began to gather in the sakla of the "respected old woman" every day - at first little by little, then more and more, at first they only approached the fence and looked through the crack, and then became more and more interested, and as a result, in the manger a few days later there were already 18-20 children. The nursery worker interviewed the mothers; In her free time, she held meetings with the farm laborers in the aul and made reports in the Komsomol cell. And so, when the time came to close the nursery, the Circassian women asked to leave them for the winter, saying that only now they saw how the Soviet government takes care of mountain women and their children, how it teaches women to raise children and raise them healthy. the experience of organizing nurseries in the region is of great interest and is of great importance in further instilling the ideas of matmlad and health care among the Circassian population. The matter of protecting matmlad and health is just emerging here. It is difficult to work among Circassian women. Nevertheless, next to the oppressed, downtrodden Circassian woman in Adygea, a new woman, a social activist, is already emerging. The main thing is that a shift has been made. The Circassian woman already knows that she is free; There are many cases when Circassian women themselves apply to the court with statements about their rights, divorce, etc., or to the women's department to protect their interests. During 1924-25, Circassian women independently filed 53 applications for divorce, including 4 due to their unwillingness to live with a husband, who is a criminal element. There is a large increase in the number of Circassian-shenok-narzassessatelits. In 1925, there were 78 of them, making up 4Оо / о to the total number of women-narrators. The participation of Circassian women in the elective bodies of Soviet power (especially in the lower bodies) is growing; Thus, the number of Circassian women-members of village councils, district executive committees and regional executive committees by year is presented in the following form: We have already mentioned that before the revolution the literate Circassian population was no more than Zo / O. In this respect, an even more bleak picture is observed among the female half of the Circassian population; here in 1924 the literacy rate among women was only 1.2-1.5o / o. Only the revolution gave a push to plant enlightenment among the broader masses of the population of the present Adyghe-Cherkessk region. Already in 1918, the Circassian primer was published. Since that time, in the Circassian schools, instruction in the first year began to be conducted in the native language, and in subsequent years in Russian. The number of schools in the villages began to grow rapidly, with the initiative in opening schools coming from the lower classes. A number of schools were often spontaneously opened, and by the 1921-22 academic year there were already 42 Circassian schools with 2.171 students, which is 21.7% / about the total number of Circassian schoolchildren. The number of girls studying in schools at that time was about 650. A more systematic and successful development of the national Circassian school began in 1922, when the Adygei-Circassian region was formed as an autonomous unit. New primary schools and various political and educational institutions are opened and a solid foundation is laid for vocational education. The school network and the number of students in Adygea grows from 1921 to 1926. visible from the following tables:
The region has a pedagogical college with 46 Circassian students, including 8 girls. The regional soviet school has 44 Circassian women within its walls. In 1925, three Circassian women from the Soviet Union were sent to the Rostov Soviet Union. There are also Circassian students at the workers' schools and universities in the mountains. Moscow and others. Along with all this, there is continuous work through the clubs of mountain women, regional and mobile libraries, reading huts, vocational schools, cinema travels, and so on. This is how enlightenment spreads among the Circassian population. Unrelenting work in this area is the main guarantee for the eradication of the age-old routine, old traditions and customs, which are still so strongly constraining the Circassian woman on the way to cultural progress.