4. The position of women under Soviet rule
A completely different perspective opened up before the mountain woman under the Soviet regime, who established the equality of men and women. Work on the emancipation of mountain women is carried out in several directions, of which the most important, of course, is to attract mountain women to social and political life. If we remember that before the revolution a mountain woman was excluded from any kind of qi participation in this life, and compare with this the facts presented below, then the presence of a giant shift in this respect becomes clear. And since the figures also provide us with an illustration of the continuous development of the awakened social instincts of the mountain woman, the task of further growth of work among women can be generally considered secured. They discuss the economic and legal status of the mountain woman, which is of paramount importance in everyday life. Vigorous work is being done to involve women in councils; their number is increasing every year. So, in 1926 we have a large increase in the activity of women voters in all constituencies and districts without exception, and in the districts the percentage of female voters ranged from 8 to 58.5 percent, and throughout Dagestan the number of female voters increased from 2.6 percent to 1924 to 32.5 percent, in 1926 (i.e., 121 / year more). This activity of women was reflected in the increase in the percentage of women in the councils. By. to city councils, the percentage of women increased from 13.3 in 1925 to 15.4 in 1926. According to the aul councils, the increase is even greater: from 3.9 percent, in 1925, the percentage of women members of the village councils increased to 9.4 percent, in 1926 (an increase of 5 percent). In 1927, the re-election campaign took place in conditions of unprecedented activity. In many areas, mountain women outnumbered men in activity and number. In several auls, women have been elected chairmen of village councils. There is almost not a single village council where they are not members. This is already a great achievement if we bear in mind the cultural backwardness of Dagestan (see Appendix). Work is carried out separately among girls. In the cities, work is carried out in the general cells of the Komsomol. In the mountains, where the everyday traditions that isolate women from men are still very strong, there are 10 separate cells. Komsomol girls are attracted to participate in delegate meetings, work in clubs, visit sakli-reading rooms. All this work is carried out under the leadership of the Komsomol. A central club of mountain women has been opened in Makhach-Kala, with about 100 members; of which 5O "/ o are local. The club has circles: musical and choral, theater and drama. The club has a sewing workshop, which employs 25 women; he also has a school of cutting and sewing. In addition, there are women's clubs in several counties. In the mountains, 8 sakley-reading rooms have been set up for Daghestani women. The center where the work on the release of the mountain woman is concentrated is the Dagestan women's department. According to the data for 1926, the apparatus of the central women's department consisted of four female workers. There are twenty-six female workers in Dagestan's party committees. Of these, 16 are local nominations who have completed a seven-month course for female workers from the indigenous population. The Dagestan women's department has to work in extremely difficult conditions. In addition to the cultural backwardness of the country, a big brake is (the lack of more or less convenient means of communication with the districts. A significant obstacle is (the multilingualism and diversity of the population of Dagestan, which greatly complicates the communication of the workers of the center with the places. In order to eliminate this obstacle, the women's department conducts short-term training and retraining courses mountain women for work in auls among women. This work rests against the need to strengthen the work on general cultural and educational work among women. As the reader probably * remembers, women's enlightenment before the revolution was completely absent, except for the meager beginnings of religious studies. Taking into account the paramount importance of this sector of the struggle, the Soviet government, above all, has to overcome the inertia of life.In order to eliminate the influence of the family, which does not allow women to education, two boarding schools for 110 girls were opened in the cities of Buinaksk and Derbent; all of them study in schools. In addition, mountain women learn and in two teacher training colleges located in the cities mentioned. In some districts there are (special schools for girls. Several indigenous Dagestani women study in the higher educational institutions of the Union. Among the measures of the Soviet government in the liberation of women, orphanages occupy a prominent place. In Dagestan there are 9 orphanages, in which 620 children receive communist education. at home are centers where children are accustomed to collective work, learn to read and write, learn various crafts. Much attention is paid to the pioneer movement and Komsomol work among them. For the economic liberation of the Dagestani woman, handicraft artels are planted, which can give material support to her. striving for economic independence. Women are employed in 17 cartels producing carpets (South Dagestan), Asian cloths (Darginsky district) and beetroot (Andean district). Such artels create a production interest for uniting mountain women. However, it should be said that there are many shortcomings in the work of artels due to the lack of experienced managers, lack (in funds and inadequate assistance from other organizations. The participation of mountain women in industrial enterprises is still insignificant. Currently, only 688 people are employed in production. the factory employs 478 people, and the cannery employs 163. In addition, the Dagestani woman takes part in professional work, and the number of women trade union members is constantly growing. Thus, in 1 / UG1-25, there were 3,333 trade union members, of whom indigenous nationalities - 182 people; on 1 / X-26 years the number of trade union members increased to 4581 people; of them local mountain women - 363. According to European unions they are distributed as follows: rabzemles - 309; labor demand - 541; textile workers - 499; iarpit 217; food workers - 442; nurses - 590. As for the cooperation, we have some achievements here too.Of the total number of cooperative women 3.678, the share of local mountain women falls 2.265 people, and It is important to note that there is an increase in the number of auls, where in 1925 there were 195 mountain women, and in 1926 there were 2,265. Very little has been done in the field of cultural and educational work. Only a few districts have centers for the elimination of illiteracy among women. Another big drawback is that there is almost no literature on the women's issue in local languages. Compared to the need and. To educate the female population of Dagestan, among whom the percentage of illiterates reaches 98%, all this, of course, is not enough, the difficulties are great, and therefore it is not surprising that even under Soviet rule, schools in rural areas enroll only 3,619 girls. also leaves a lot to be desired. Only recently (and then in the center) one consultation for mother and child was opened. Permanent nurseries are open in the center. There are summer nurseries in the village Chokh of the Gunib district. A mother and child home has been organized in Makhach-Kala. It is necessary to expand the network of these institutions, which will help the real emancipation of the mountain woman. Of the measures of the legislative order, it is necessary to point out the decree of the Dagestan government on the equal rights of the mountain woman. This decree introduces the Soviet foundations of life into the backward life of Dagestan and gives the court an opportunity. Defend the interests of the mountain woman. Polygamy is prohibited; the age of marriage for both men and women is not lower than 18 years. Parents who force a girl to marry against her will are prosecuted. Kalym is also prohibited. Soviet law gives complete freedom of divorce for women. True, due to the vitality of everyday traditions, the mountain woman is forced to seek a Sharia divorce, because otherwise none of the highlanders would marry her. Therefore, the Soviet court puts economic pressure on her husband who does not want to give a divorce, seeking alimony from him in favor of his wife living from their parents. Practice has shown the feasibility of such an event. The Soviet right of inheritance has already been introduced for the Muslims of Dagestan. Decrees alone are not enough for the actual emancipation of the mountain woman: the strength of the old traditions is still too great to be eradicated by legislative means alone. It must be borne in mind that the highlander is the master of the situation in the family that. a man, in general, is an authority for a mountain woman; without his sympathy and active support, she will not dare to take a single decisive step. Therefore, in the Dagestan conditions, where even responsible workers quite often do not allow their wives to attend meetings and generally isolate them from any social work, the issue of propaganda among the male population in favor of the emancipation of women acquires particular importance. Frequent complaints from women workers about these phenomena speak volumes about the need to wage a decisive ideological struggle against the backward views of the male population. How original and wild these views of women are can be seen from the following examples taken from life. In one village a girl gave birth to a child — in the opinion of the villagers, illegitimate. On the initiative of the men, all the women of the aul brought the woman in labor to the bridge, beaten with stones and thrown down. The mountain woman had a child in her arms. Mother died immediately. The next day, the child also died. In relation to the citizen who was the father of the child, the local authorities did not take any measures. And here is another no less striking example of bullying a woman. One mountain woman became pregnant in the absence of her husband from another man whom she loved before. marriage, but her parents did not marry her. For fear of being killed, she stated that she had been raped. When she went to her parents, asking them for protection, the latter kicked her out and wanted to stone her. Fortunately, I arrived in time before the village councilor, who took her to him and did not let them deal with the unfortunate woman. The village council informed the women's department that it was necessary to save the life of this woman. The head of the women's department and the secretary of the Komsomol arrived there. The population surrounded them and began to ask for permission to arrange lynching against this mountain woman, as she had disgraced the entire village, especially women. On the initiative of the women's department, a wide meeting of mountain women was created, which was attended by up to 300 people. Those present expected that the representative of the women's department would allow them to deal with the mountain woman. They explained to them that it was not the mountain woman's fault, but the man's fault, who knows well that the consequences can only affect the woman. Nevertheless, the crowd again began throwing stones at the unfortunate woman and, in the presence of the head of the women's department, scolded and beat her. In view of this, it was decided to take her to the center. The mountain women continued to throw stones after the driving away. Then her parents would come from the aul to take her to them, assuring them that they would not do anything to her. Zhenotdel dismissed the woman, taking from them a receipt that if something happened to her, both they and the entire population of the aul would be responsible ... In conclusion, we will indicate in what directions the further activities of both the women's department and other party members should develop, Soviet and public institutions and organizations, directly interested in others in the emancipation of the mountain woman. Until now, work among mountain women was carried out mainly in the lowland Dagestan, as in the most cultural region of the entire republic. It is necessary to move the center of gravity to the mountainous part, which is possible only if there is a sufficiently and well-trained cadre of women from the indigenous population. Serious attention should be paid to sanitary and educational work among mountain women. The darkness and age-old customs do not allow a Dagestani woman to seek medical help from a male doctor. Moreover, she does not resort to the help of a Russian midwife. Recently in the village of Khunzakh (the center of the Avar district) such a case took place. One mountain woman had a difficult birth that urgently required the help of a midwife. She was advised to invite a midwife. However, the mother of the woman in labor preferred to use the services of the grandmother, saying that she did not want to defile her daughter's body with the touch of a Russian woman's hand. As a result, the mountain woman died as a victim of domestic savagery. In the field of social diseases, special attention should be paid to venereal diseases, which made a strong nest in many auls (especially syphilis). If urgent measures are not taken, then many auls are threatened with extinction. Work among Dagestani women should be based on the local women workers who are popular among the population, who directly, without the help of an interpreter, can communicate in their native language with a mountain woman. In her eyes, the authority of the person who works among them is of great importance. That is why only those women workers in the women's department can count on success with mountain women who will be able to approach them sensitively. The experience of seven years of work on Soviet construction in the mountains has shown how important and necessary knowledge of the cultural and everyday characteristics of Dagestan is for the correct approach to resolving certain issues. The fact is that with a skillful approach, a highlander easily succumbs to new ideas and cultural influences from outside. The achievements of Soviet power in recent years are proof of this. When working among women in Dagestan, the focus should be on improving the economic experience, i.e. on the further expansion of handicraft-industrial organizations where there are the necessary conditions (for example, in the Andean region it would be possible to organize mountain women around the drilling industry, etc. "). Such organizations would contribute to the complete emancipation of the mountain woman. At the same time, efforts should be made to educate the younger generation in order to give mountain women the opportunity to get an education. In the near future, it is necessary to maximize the number of students in higher education institutions of mountain women by providing them with all kinds of benefits. In this great endeavor, a Russian woman should lend a helping hand to the Dagestani pioneers in public work.1 'The downtrodden, still frightened mountain woman is already active in public work: she is beginning to take an interest in her rights. We have a lot of cases when a mountain woman goes to a Soviet court, demanding a divorce from her husband. It is not uncommon for her, dissatisfied with the Sharia decision of the case, to submit it to the people's court. The old foundations of everyday life have already been shaken. There is no previous unquestioning obedience to her husband. For beating her husband, a mountain woman submits an application to the court. She raises the issue of summer nurseries, points for the elimination of illiteracy, girls' day schools, etc. Thus, we see a big shift in the life of a Dagestani woman towards a new way of life. But the forces of the old way of life are still tremendous, and the final emancipation of the mountain woman can be realized only as a result of many years and persistent work. We have all the evidence that this time will inevitably come and that Dagestanka will take a place that befits her in society on a par with the Russian woman, who already enjoys the benefits gained by the Great October Revolution.

Application.
Information on the number of women in various organizations:

The number of parties and candidates ...................... 450 people.
members and candidates of the VLKSM ....... 911
„Of them mountain women ................... ... 353
Trade union membership ................. 4.534
„Of them mountain women ....................... 363
Village Councils .................. 1.004
People's assessors ........... 371
In the re-elections in 1926 participated ............. 69.689
“I took part in delegate meetings for the same year. 3.517
„Of them local ................................ 2.336
The number of mountain women cooperating. ... 2.265
“The handicraft industry employs ............. 24.950
,, In 17 production artels are united. ... ... 1.086