3. The position of women in Turkmenistan under Soviet rule
As a result of the October Revolution, the old economic relations in Turkmenistan were dealt a terrible blow; The clan system, which for centuries performed its business of preserving the Turkmen people, thanks to the economic measures of the Soviet power (land and water reform, etc.), was shaken to the ground among the sedentary population of the TSSR. The bourgeoisie and feudal lords were pushed back and gave way to the working population. The right of custom is replaced by Soviet law. The same is happening with Islam, with its Sharia. The foundations of the old Turkmen system are being broken, a new Soviet life is taking its place, and, of course, the rapid growth of culture is impossible and it is impossible to catch up with other more cultured peoples as long as the Turkmen woman remains in her former slave position. Therefore, as the Soviet power in Central Asia was consolidated, little by little, the liberation of the toiler of Turkmenistan began to take place. With the national demarcation of Central Asia, with the beginning of the nation-building of new republics, the women's issue received more attention, and the work to emancipate the Turkmen woman also went ahead with faster steps. At the Constituent Congress of Soviets of Turkmenistan, which took place in February 1925, the declaration on the formation of the TSSR proclaimed: "Recognizing full equal rights for a woman, the TSSR takes all measures to eliminate all living conditions that are in the nature of restricting women's rights." The session of the Central Executive Committee of the TSSR in October 1926 adopted decrees on kalym, divorce, on the prohibition of polygamy and the marriage of minors Also, the 2nd Congress of Soviets of the TSSR devoted much attention to the cause of the emancipation of women and addressed a special appeal to the women of Turkmenistan on specific measures The leadership of all work in this area belongs to the women's department of the Central Committee of the CPT (b) and the Commission for improving the living conditions of workers at the Central Executive Committee of the TSSR. Work among women has been severely hindered and is still hindered by the lack of Turkmen party women’s forces. However, there are already tremendous achievements in this area, which suggest that the task of involving a Turkmen woman in the party is well established. The time has passed when there was not a single Turkmen woman among the female party activists, now there are more than 30 of them, that is, about 6% of the total party composition of the TSSR. At the same time, it must be said that given the living conditions existing in the TSSR, this number should not be considered small. Party work among the Turkmen women is rather difficult, since the influence of everyday life is felt even in the work of the cells. In some places of the TSSR, trying to get out of this situation, they even try to create special female cells. The situation is more normal with work among girls, for whom separate Komsomol cells are being created; their conferences and meetings are convened separately from the men. Work with Komsomol members is directly supervised by women's departments. Women make up about one tenth of the total number of the Komsomol. Likewise, the pioneer movement penetrates the environment of children. Detachments of pioneer girls are usually found at dehkan's clubs and corners. The number of the female Turkmen proletariat is also growing; industrial development will play an important role in this matter. The spinning and weaving factory established in Ashgabat alone will provide jobs for several hundred women from the indigenous population. The absence of female farm laborers in the TSSR is explained by the prohibition on the part of the Turkmen custom of keeping women in the house, except for wives and concubines. A few years ago, it would have sounded improbable that a Turkmen woman could actively participate in the political life of the country and governing it, while now this has become possible, and every year it shows more and more female activity. In the last elections to the aul councils in 1927, 6% of women were elected, twice as many as in the previous year. On the initiative of the Central Election Commission, it was allowed to organize separate women's pre-election meetings and elections. The women showed great interest and attentive attitude to the case. Here, for example, how the women's meeting (pre-election) proceeded in the village of Ata, Tejen district. Out of 84 women attended the meeting, 21. The pre-village council made a report, and then asked: "Will there be questions? The questions were mixed with short speeches. smoky wagon at the women's meeting. One said: “So that there are no offended people when dividing land and water ... Leave on this site where we live now. Another one:“ The Soviet government has been paying no attention to women for several years. We are not given land. Why? -And she looked menacingly at the pre-village council. The resolution was passed without any outside guidance: - When distributing land and water, women do not forget to give them shares. The second report was heard on the participation of women in the election campaign. They spoke as the heart suggested. — You say that we go to meetings, study, and men look at us badly. — True, you say that the Soviet government did a lot for us, but only did not remake the men. — Do you understand the report ? —Got it. —Well, what resolution will we pass? —A question to the whole meeting. Aman Sultan — an activist — simply confessed: —By we understand that something needs to be said, but we cannot say how and what. A note as a member of the village council. The Koschi Union named two women. The women grew bolder, asked for the floor. “We must choose one, but one that will twist everyone, so that she is mobile and brisk. Last year the old woman was chosen, she was in prison, but there was no benefit from her. — Kisel Muradova. — It was hard — the old woman was rejected. Another woman was named. — Many children. — Aman Sultan Kara-bai Kyzy. Women raised two hands ... There were cases that at general election meetings, female candidates received the largest number of votes or the results of elections in which women were held as members of the village council , met with applause. Women were also elected to the presidium of the aulsovet, to district conventions and to the Congress of Soviets. Of course, in Ashgabat, in the central institutions of the TSSR, up to and including the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee, Turkmen women are now working. The attraction of broad layers of dekhkans to public life and the identification of the most active of them takes place through the institution of delegates and dekhkan women 's camps. However, the work with the introduction of the institution of female delegates is still only experimental, far from the cities, which is explained both by the weakness of party influence there and by the living conditions. In auls, the work of delegates is intermittent, they are not all involved in practical work, and their connection with voters is weak. Out of 749 female delegates of the TSSR, there are only 35 Turkmen women. At first, and this happens sometimes even now, the delegates were subjected to all sorts of bullying and persecution by the reactionary part of the men. kind of aul settlements and nomads. Here, depending on the type of economy, there are different conditions for women to work: the best in purely agricultural areas, where Party and Soviet work has been established, the situation is worse in areas with a mixed agricultural and cattle breeding type of economy, and in purely nomadic areas, work among women is very difficult Taking into account the living conditions, it was allowed to set up special women's clubs and dekhkanka corners where women could be without fear of meeting men. So far, there is only one establishment of an expanded club type for Turkmen women, this is Ts. D. D., Central House of Dekhkanka named after Clara Zetkin in Ashgabat. In view of the absence of the indigenous population in Ashgabat itself, the work of Ts.D. D. is designed for the dekhkans of neighboring auls, and he, replacing the clubs, is a link between dekhkans and the general Soviet culture. In addition, it is designed to serve the wives of a party member, Komsomol member, member of the Koshchi Union. Ts. D. D. has: an outpatient clinic — consultation, legal advice, bedrooms, classroom, work room, nursery, club hall, etc. Work Ts. D. D. among the Turkmen women is conducted in several directions, according to which the organization of the House was built. The cultural and educational department has a school for the elimination of illiteracy, to which they try to attract dekhkans, so that they can then be sent to obstetric or pedagogical courses. Also at Ts. D. D. there are one-year courses for the training of regional workers from the indigenous population among women. In Ts.D.D.D., reports and talks are given, especially political ones, on hygiene and sanitation. Periodically, visits are made to auls with doctors or a sister, where patients are received, medicines are distributed, conversations are arranged on medical topics. cinematographer Ts. House. Trips popularize Ts.D.D.D .; with some auls there is a constant connection. The task of the labor department is to disseminate cultural skills and methods in agriculture and domestic work among dehkans. Outpatient clinic — a consultation serviced by a woman of doctors, in addition to outpatient appointments, also conducts individual conversations on the protection of mothers and infants, hygiene, etc. In the Ts.DD, farmers are given legal advice and explanations. Having lived in Ts.D. D. for some time (up to 2 weeks) in a completely different than the aul environment, the dekhkan, having acquired a number of cultural skills and habits, becomes in her aul a bearer of a more cultured life, a popularizer of Ts. D. D. The influence of C. D. D. is expanding and brings good results; thus, at the request of the dehkan women who got acquainted with the Ts. DD, a number of schools were opened in the Ashgabat district. Ts. DD is the first experience in the USSR, which has already justified itself and in its work among women pursuing the goal not only to awaken them, but also to educate them. In addition to Ts. DD, in the TSSR, in the auls, there are about 2 dozen red corners for women of the indigenous population. However, not all of these corners have dedicated employees and work from time to time, from meeting to meeting. Some corners have a sewing machine, which serves as a bait for aul farmers. Existing in the railway dor. at points, women's clubs (New Chardzhui) are not purely Turkmen in nature, serving Russians as well; they also have educational programs, consultations, playgrounds, cooperative women's shops. In the spread of education among Turkmen women, the Party and the Soviet government have already done and are doing a huge amount of work. There are, however, certain difficulties: on the one hand, there is the opposition of reactionary elements, on the other, there is almost complete illiteracy among women. Before the October Revolution, a literate Turkmen woman was a very rare exception among her sisters and, as we have already indicated, back in 1924 there were only 25 literate Turkmen women in the whole of Turkmenistan, but now things are constantly improving. In order to directly influence children and spread cultural skills among the population, attention is paid to the organization of kindergartens in auls; 13 such gardens have already been opened; they are attended by several hundred Turkmen children, the percentage of girls in them is not yet high. Several hundred Turkmen girls study in schools, some in special closed schools (boarding schools); the school network is constantly growing. In order to attract more girls to schools, a number of privileges were provided to the Turkmens who send their daughters to study, and also, yielding to the way of life, separate schools were set up for them. The number of schools for the eradication of female illiteracy is also increasing. On the part of women, the craving for learning is very great, while some men - husbands, fathers, brothers - sometimes even send women to school, others are more reactionary, adhering to the Muslim view of women's education as an unacceptable and harmful thing , in every possible way prevent their loved ones from studying, and in such cases they sometimes have to attend schools secretly from men. Since one of the main obstacles in cultural and educational work in the TSSR is the lack of indigenous workers in the field of education, and Russians are not always able to approach the Turkmens, not knowing their language and living conditions, the issue of training a cadre of Turkmen women for this work among women attracted due attention. For the time being, pedagogical courses for indigenous women have been opened, and two institutes of public education and a pedagogical college are also serving this purpose. Higher education is also gradually beginning to penetrate the female environment; on the one hand, Turkmen women study in universities in Tashkent, on the other, in Moscow and Leningrad. Generally speaking, taking into account the living conditions and the state of women's education before the October Revolution, it must be considered that tremendous success has been achieved in this area. and infancy in the TSSR a lot of attention is paid, since it is very important for the Turkmen people. The poor hygienic living conditions of the Turkmen in general, and especially children, lead to enormous infant mortality; this is also facilitated by the lack of many of the most elementary cultural skills among the population, up to and including the use of soap. The Turkmen have many diseases of skin, eye (trachoma) and venereal diseases. There are many children with scab, scabies, eczema and eye diseases. Life in a wagon, which is a wooden lattice frame covered only with felt, blown through by cold air (frosts in the TSSR sometimes reach 30 °, and even in an open place) and unheated, leads to frequent lung diseases. In addition, the dirty environment of the wagon, life in semi-darkness and cramped conditions force us to raise the question of the soonest possible replacement of the wagon with a house for the settled population. The kibitka is already on the way to culture. Marriage of young people and minors and maiming of women in childbirth due to lack of obstetric care and basic scientific knowledge lead to a high incidence of female diseases among the indigenous female population. legislation protecting mother and child; and ideological influence on the male population in order to improve the status of women. Special commissions for the dissemination of sanitary and hygienic knowledge are working in the localities, a network of obstetric centers and consultations has been laid out, nurseries are being arranged for children, which play an important role for Turkmen mothers, teaching them how to handle children. Likewise, cooperation goes to meet mother and child, having among its goods also sanitary, hygiene and medicine items. However, the matter is hampered by the absence of leaders from among the indigenous population itself; Attention has already been paid to this issue, and in order to quickly create Turkmen midwifery personnel in Ashgabat, an obstetric technical school for 60 people was opened, replenished exclusively from the indigenous population. and the marriage of minors, and the declaration of the kalym as illegal enrichment, which can now be demanded back, it cannot yet be said that this will come true. Soviet legislation is far from being implemented everywhere, and often, if it is, it is in a distorted form. The influence of adat is still too strong. In the city of Kaakhka, the court tried a case on the charge of a Turkmen who forced his 14-year-old son to marry an 18-year-old. Notdels distinguish in courts in cases affecting the interests of women, special advocates and public prosecutors, and attract women to the judges. These measures — the participation of women in the work of the courts — are absolutely necessary in the TSSR, although it should be noted that, in general, this participation is still insufficient, and there are still few Narza-sedators; however, as the female asset grows, the situation improves. In addition, special consultations are organized on women's affairs (as, for example, under Ts.D.D.). At the same time, one cannot talk about the emancipation of a woman while she is economically dependent on her husband, father, brother, guardian, etc. It is necessary to give her the opportunity to become economically independent. In the TSSR, this task is facilitated by the fact that almost every Turkmen woman, in addition to her household work, contributes to the family budget at least g / 5 - D of the total family income through her handicraft labor (mainly carpet weaving, which is not done only 2-3 % of all Turkmen women). It was necessary to unite, organize, support the carpet weavers, find a sale for their works, and provide orders. This all makes women more independent in their family and strengthens their relationship with the public. After the World War and the Civil War, carpet making fell dramatically compared to the pre-war period; the task of the day was to raise this branch of handicraft labor by cooperating producers. This work began as early as 1922/23, but until 25 years old it did not bring great results, when the women's department of the Central Committee of the Communist Party (Bolsheviks) paid serious attention to this issue, and the cooperation of handicraft carpet weavers was put on a broader scale, and other institutions were involved in this matter. (Gostorg, VSNKh, Banks). Having started with 7 artels with 150 dekhkans at the beginning of 1926, the number of artels is constantly growing and has increased tenfold over the last year. On the part of farmers, the artels cause the best attitude; thousands of applications are being made for the formation of new artels and the provision of loans. In order to raise the qualifications of carpet weavers and preserve the valuable old drawings that have begun to disappear, courses for carpet weaving were opened in Merv in 1926. Cooperation of handicraftsmen of other specialties (for example, silk weavers) is next in line, but does not matter much. cooperative shops set up in Central Asia, including the TSSR; such a shop operates in Old Chardzhui. There the Turkmen woman is not afraid to meet men}, and a special selection of goods satisfies the taste and needs of the customers. The number of female shareholders is constantly growing. The organization of independent female households is also one of the means of economic liberation for women. In 1925-26, a land reform was carried out in the TSSR, but at the same time the land taken from the landowners and kulaks was distributed not according to the air, but among the farms; therefore, of the women, only those who managed their own household and widows were given land. In total, over 1,200 women's farms have been established. However, the assistance to these farms is still insufficient; some of them have few living and dead inventory. The creation of women's farms is a clear and vivid agitation for women's equality. Soviet culture, having burst into Turkmen life, regulated by adat, is continuously expanding and deepening its influence. Under the guidance of more experienced and cultured workers, the emancipation of the Turkmen woman is being accomplished. The area of ​​family relations, where a woman had no rights according to adat, is one of the most striking examples of the successes achieved. It is not yet everywhere, but in some places the woman felt equal in the family. Although the proverb says that “the cow does not choose water, but the woman of her husband”, now the farmer is beginning to refuse to marry the man she was married to in the cradle. Under the protection of Soviet laws, the Turkmen woman herself began to seek a divorce from her husband, although this does not happen so often. So, in 1925, 422 applications for divorce were filed in total. Most of the requirements for divorce are caused by beatings, opium smoking by husbands, polygamy and a very large difference in years (the wife is 20 years old, and the husband is 60 or 90). A divorce at the request of the wife, regardless of the reason that caused it, is the moral murder of the husband, therefore divorces are made only if they are justified, and besides, it should be borne in mind that according to Turkmen laws, all divorces, in order to protect the rights of women, go through the courts The work of Soviet power brings cultural light into the depths of the TSSR, but, of course, this violates the interests of all those who are not profitable for the changes, and from this side it encounters strong opposition. opposition both from all the reactionary elements of the country (clergy, kulaks-bai), and from part of the male population of the country, if their interests are affected by the new order, although among the advanced part of men there has been a sharp change in views on the emancipation of women. Unfortunately, even some of the Turkmen party members could not immediately abandon the old views and institutions, and the central party The authorities had to draw their attention to the complete inadmissibility for the party members of polygamy, kalym, the marriage of minors, etc. On the other hand, not all persons who are part of the Soviet administrative and judicial apparatus have learned or wished to learn the basics of the new legal situation women, thanks to which they allow the distortion of Soviet legislation. There were even such isolated facts as the case that occurred in Ashgabat, when, in front of a guard policeman, a Turkmen husband killed his wife, a cadet at an obstetric college; to a cry for help from her friends, with whom the murdered woman was walking down the street, the policeman replied: “this is a private matter of the husband and wife, no one should interfere.” The judiciary is sometimes inattentive to protecting women's interests, dragging out such cases, and it feels like that the indigenous workers of the investigation and inquiry do not look at the position of women from the point of view of Soviet legality. However, despite all the dangers, despite the fact that it is still far from complete emancipation, and new ideas, the further inland the country, the more opposition they find, Most of the women are still far from realizing the gravity of their situation, there are more and more brave Turkmen women who do not stop before threats, persecution, beatings, attempts on their lives, etc. and break the connection with their old life. for his courage, for work in the women's department or as a delegate, disobedience to her husband, desire to study, and the like. Among the dead are Anne Kulieva, the founder of the Center. House of Dekhkanka and Anna Dzhemal, an active worker in the liberation of a woman from Turkmenistan. Many women had and now have to endure a lot for the desire to use the rights proclaimed by the Soviet government. However, every year the cause of the liberation of the Turkmen toiler is moving forward, and the results obtained in this backward country can be called quite satisfactory. With the spread of enlightenment and the growth of party influence in the TSSR, the cause of the complete emancipation of the Turkmen woman will more and more move towards its full realization.