4. The woman of Uzbekistan after the revolution
"Ar'vat" - in Russian, literally, "nakedness", that is, what needs to be covered, how to hide nakedness, what is indecent to show to people — this is how the word “woman” sounded in Turkestan in the language of official relations, the language of its civil and religious culture — Arabic. It seems that there was no more humiliating name for a woman in humanity True, the Arabs had and still retained for the concept of "woman" such words as "imra" from the Semitic word "im" - "mother" and "nisa", formed from "nnis" - "nanny, nanny", peasant means, again, an older sister. Only a perverted urban culture created by the merchant feudal class of medieval Persia and Arabia, only! this culture, which subsequently spread along with Islam to Turkestan, pushed the words "nisa" and "imra" into the personal family life, introducing its own new word into the language of civil relations instead. A woman, as it were, has ceased to be called a woman. They began to call her arvat — nudity, respectively, with every concealment and concealment of it. A culture that has developed such an attitude, sufficiently developed, woven into one whole with religion, has grown together with people to such an extent that the thought of a change in the position of a woman simply could not come to mind, and if it did, it would seem That is why, it was so difficult for workers and women workers in the field of women's emancipation to develop their business, started and led by the Communist Party since the establishment of Soviet power in the region in 1920, but most energetically developed by the women's department since 1923, those. since the cleansing of Uzbekistan from the gangs of counter-revolutionaries-Basmachi. As expected, the cause of the liberation of a woman evokes persistent opposition not only from the teachers and guardians of the old culture - the mullahs, who turned Bukhara into one of its world centers, as well as clan elders, etc. very influential people in Uzbekistan, but also on the part of a significant part of the male half of the Uzbek people. Despite all this, the achievement, in spite of all this, of very significant results in the field of her liberation, the woman of Uzbekistan owes primarily to the exceptional tact shown by the Communist Party at every step when performing this unusually difficult Thanks to this, within three years, what seemed feasible before the revolution not earlier than in several decades was achieved. The Soviet power and the Communist Party, having restored the importance of women in Uzbekistan, equalizing her rights with men, won for the Uzbek woman a rather wide place in life Several years t Now, who had the right to live only in the backyards, the Uzbek now, together with the man, rules her homeland. Already in 1925, 9 Uzbek women were members of the Central Executive Committee of Uzbekistan, several dozen worked as members in the executive committees of the region and in the collegia of the people's commissariats. Every year the number of women increases with significant leaps. Meeting of the Women's Department in a large village in the Tashkent Region. Peshkientechin in councils. If in 1924, as a result of only one year of work on the emancipation of women in Uzbekistan, 200 Uzbek women were elected to the councils of the region, then in the next 25 there were already about 1,500 of them, and in 26 more than 4,000, amounting to 13 percent of all members x). Moreover, some of the councils of this country of women's slavery and humiliation are headed by Uzbek women. There were 6 such councils with women as chairpersons in 25, but in 26, already 20. In this last year, Uzbek women showed tremendous activity in the elections to councils. They vigorously took away those seeking to get into the councils of bays (kulaks), bribe-takers, expelled from the meeting wives who were deprived of the right to elect. The greatest activity was shown by women who received land in 1925-26. land reform, as well as the wives of farm laborers. In general, the proletarian stratum of the Uzbek peasantry — farm laborers and poor people — are ahead of the rest of the strata in matters of equality for women. Almost all of them brought their wives to elective meetings and helped themselves to fight the bai. The Baysky element, already very angry, is even more agitated against the poor for their widespread emancipation of their wives. Finding fault with this, Bai declares emancipation as apostasy from the faith and the nation. Using this accusation as a legitimate pretext for a merciless struggle, the bais and the most backward elements of the kishlak often go as far as beatings, and sometimes even to the murder of liberators and the liberated. Thus, having become one of the factors of the class struggle, the process of the woman's liberation forces the Uzbek woman to participate in this struggle shoulder to shoulder with. as for the peasant women who want to live completely independently ', without a husband, namely widows and divorced, or who have left a difficult marriage and do not want to remarry, then they received, previously completely unaccessible for them, the opportunity to organize themselves into female artels, agricultural or agricultural. When the land reform was carried out in the Fergana region in 1926, land was also allotted at the request for indie formal (single) female farms. There were 52 such women's farms in only one Fergana district with allotments from 2 to 18 tanapov per capita, that is, according to our measure, from 1/3 D ° 3 dessiatines. The majority received plots of 4 and 6 tanapas, that is, tithe. Up to 500 women's farms have been formed throughout Uzbekistan. Together with the land, Uzbek women also received agricultural implements and thus became independent owners. With the habit of the powerlessness of women rooted in Turkestan, the allotment of land to her made a revolution in the minds of the dekhkans (peasantry). The Uzbek women allotted with land united at that time in 11 artels. The first year of independent labor gave good results: the artels reaped a high harvest, acquired new agricultural works. equipment, 6 artels of Fergana region received a tractor. These artels now employ 8 Uzbek tractor drivers who have completed special courses in the city of Namangan. In the Samarkand region, the so-called "Union of Koshchi" takes an active part in the organization of women's agricultural artels. This union arose as follows: For an organized struggle against the kulak, in the republics of Central Asia: Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, the poorest peasant the population unites in the union "Koshchi" (in Russian "land-worker"), which sets its tasks: to protect the interests of the poor and to organize economic assistance to the low-powered farms of the poor. The Union takes upon itself the organization of mutual assistance, takes an active part in the implementation of the land reform begun in 1925, provides assistance to those farms that received land under this reform, campaigns for raising agriculture by applying new forms of land cultivation, displacing plowing a wooden plow, the cultivation of the field with a "ketmen" —a big hoe, etc. Finally, the union conducts all kinds of cultural and educational work among its members, for example, on March 8, 27 and 28. He opened women's schools for the eradication of illiteracy in a number of villages in the Tashkent region. Calling on the farmer for broad participation, both in the union itself and in other urgently needed branches of public work, for example, in the kishlak council, its sections, cooperation, the school council, the union of "Koshchi" explains to the Uzbek woman the tremendous importance attached to her activities in the new life by the Soviet power, seeks to involve her in the building of the country by all means, etc. Soviet cooperative construction is one of the most important phenomena of social life, striving to be reborn into socialist forms, very successfully involves both a farmer and a city dweller.In the conditions of Uzbekistan, where the ingrained prejudice still does not allow an ordinary Uzbek woman to go to the market, and sometimes even to the store, the cooperative bodies of Uzbekistan have created an original phenomenon: cooperative women's shops ... It began with the fact that at the end of 1925, under the leadership of the Central Asian office of the Centrosoyuz, at first, one cooperative shop was set up, selling especially for women. The experience turned out to be extremely successful, showing the vital importance of expanding the business started. Two years later, there were already 17 such women's shops, which involved up to 4,000 Uzbek women in consumer cooperation by the beginning of 27. All these shops are run by female workers, of whom more than half are Uzbeks. Women's shops have justified themselves not only as a way to involve indigenous women in cooperative construction, but also from the commercial side. All shops are trading at break-even rates, giving a large turnover. Almost all women's shops have shop commissions, in which Uzbek women, members of the cooperative, are actively working. It is interesting to note that at the same time women's shops are also places of cultural work among women. Many of them have special red corners. In the cooperative shops in Tashkent, nooks for mothers and children are set aside with a cheaper sale of goods, with the exception of toys, the income from which goes to the fund for the protection of mothers and infants. Cooperation bodies also work on the construction of women's artels. They have created 18 handicraft-industrial artels, involving hundreds of women workers. In the village "Lunacharskom", near Tashkent, there is a splendid female dairy artel with over 80 members, with a hundred heads of milk yield. There are (at least 11) sericulture artels (x), seamstresses. Since 1927, the cooperative union of Uzbekistan began joint work with the People's Commissariat for Health on the protection of motherhood and infancy. In addition to the already mentioned participation in the organization of corners of mother and child. The co-union organized a permanent d) The People's Commissariat of Uzbekistan introduced special lending to women-silkworms with corn and money and, in addition, organizes the sale of cocoons. Pai exhibition-traveling on the care of a pregnant woman. From the profits of the Union, a number of children's consultations are maintained. Together with the People's Commissariat of Health, cooperative bodies also work in the organization of special commissions on the ground for the dissemination of sanitary and hygienic knowledge. Finally, trading medicines in villages, Uzbekistan's cooperation In the past, we saw what an extremely unhealthy environment women and children are surrounded by in Uzbekistan, which is why the institutions for the protection of mothers and babies, which are especially necessary here, both by the party and by the relevant bodies of the Soviet In spite of significant difficulties in the past, connected with the years of struggle against counter-revolution, the struggle that ended only in 1923, despite a number of difficulties of a different nature, the People's Commissariat of Health of Uzbekistan has already significantly deployed children's institutions. From 6 such institutions that existed in 1924, by the end of 26, their number increased to 30. There are several homes for a weakened child maintained by the Red Crescent (corresponds to our Red Cross), a large children's sanatorium (in the vicinity of Tashkent - Agalyk ). A number of colonies were organized — a school sanatorium (in Khorezm and Khiva), a children's hospital in Samarkand. The activity of school dispensaries has been expanded. Since 1926, all this work has been largely coordinated (coordinated) by the Council for the Protection of Children's Health under the People's Commissariat of Health of the Uzbek SSR. At the end of the same year, courses were organized for midwives and patronage nurses from the indigenous population. So far, almost exclusively Russian and Tatar women work in obstetrics. At the obstetric points, in the maternity hospital and in the gynecological hospital (for women's diseases), Uzbek women work as nurses. The network of organizations for women is growing along with women's clubs, and is growing quite rapidly. When in 1923 Uzbekistan was cleared of counter Basmachi revolutionaries, the organization of women's clubs began. In 23 itself, only one such club appeared, and a year later there were already 19; by the end of 26 - 34. The activities of women's clubs in Uzbekistan are remarkably diverse. A clear picture of the club life is given by the report of the head of the Tashkent women's club, from which we cite extracts: “Before organizing this Tashkent club,” writes the head of comrade Popova, “we had to talk a lot with local workers, because they were all against its organization and they said that this was a waste of money and that women should never be attracted there. ”“ The club was organized 25 — IV — 24 years. From the very beginning, we organized a children's consultation in order to help attract Uzbek women to the club. But the first days we waited in vain for visitors. Nobody went to the club. Then we held a meeting with 8 women party members on the methods of attracting Uzbek women to the club. It was decided that the communists should go and agitate among Uzbek women to visit the club. This measure gave good results. ”“ After 4-5 days, the audience began to appear, but 2-3 people. in a day. At first, we had 25-30 women who attended the club. Moreover, I must say that we managed to attract them only to the courtyard, since they did not dare to go inside the building. Now that women began to visit the club, we began to collect them in a called loud-reading room (library) and the first conversations were conducted mainly on the importance of this club ... and advised them to enroll in club members and learn to read and write. At first, women were terribly afraid of joining the club, but they still don’t take membership cards. ”“ At the end of the first half of the year, we decided to open the first artel, a blanket, since Uzbek women are most familiar with this work. The blanket artel was opened by a collective of unemployed and all funds were given from there. I must say that at first all funds were issued exclusively by the women's department. We didn’t get a single kopeck from other places. Everything was paid by the women's department, including doctors, nurses, school and workshop expenses. This is no longer the case. About six months later, a blanket artel was opened, and then a sewing workshop ... "" Currently, we have 496 members of the club. Of these, 410 are Uzbek, 66 are Tartars, and 20 of other nationalities. In terms of social status: wives and daughters of laborers — 258, female workers — 92, dehkans — 68, small traders — 76. Don't be surprised at the last circumstance. We have merchants — terrible poor people. From the very beginning there were 8 party members, and now there are 54. ”“ All the work of our club is divided into sections. There are the following sections: political education, protection of mothers and infants, cooperative and youth sections. Each section is headed by a head with special knowledge. For example, at the head of the section for the protection of mothers and infants is a doctor who is in charge of the children's clinic ... We have circles - a political circle, a circle of mothers and infancy, choral, music, a circle of MOPR and Russian literacy ... "" The second line of work, - This is a massive ... mainly consists of reports, lectures, which are weekly. Then, excursions ... A lecture is read, nair., About electricity, then an excursion to the hydroelectric station is arranged. If a medical lecture is given, then they take them on an excursion to the appropriate medical institution. ”“ We have not only the task of the club preparing female workers, releasing female workers for public work. Besides this First, we pay attention to the everyday life of an Uzbek woman ... Uzbek women receive information on sanitation and hygiene, transfer it from the club to their home life. ”“ We have now opened two new factories. The club gives women workers to the factories ... "" Now about the promotions. Of the club members, there are now nurses in kindergartens, then teachers in educational programs. There are no Uzbek heads in kindergartens yet. But there are Uzbek educators. They are all members of our club. ”“ We have 2 schools — one for the elimination of illiteracy, the other of an advanced type ... at an advanced school — 32 people. The craving for learning is enormous, especially on the part of young people "... Women's clubs are excellent at helping the party in its struggle against the veil and veil. The number of Uzbek women who once said goodbye to these harmful and painful appendages to clothing reached 3 by the day of March 8, 1927. thousand, and by the middle of the year up to one and a half thousand, which is already about half of the female world of the country. By arranging, extremely interesting for residents, the so-called "demonstration weddings" with the insce-Leninsky corner at the women's department of the Kashka-Darvin region with a new life, members of the clubs, and in this very successful way, they help the party and the Komsomol to popularize (spread to the masses) a new way of life. The unusually increased desire of young people to study, noted by the head of the club, is one of the features of ours! time. We constantly observe this phenomenon, and, moreover, among all decisively nationalities of the USSR. The thirst for learning is more and more satisfied by the gradual but steady expansion and growth of schooling, both in quality and in quantity. In Uzbekistan, the People's Commissariat for Education, having almost doubled the number * of schools in 1925-26, 3)> set as its striking task for the next three years "an all-out struggle for the quality of the 'school business." In Central Asia, taking into account the entrenched views of the local population, since then it is necessary to open special schools for girls. The number of such schools, encompassing only 6 schools for all girls, is still very small, but it is steadily increasing every year by 2-3 times and is making big gains among the dekhans of Uzbekistan, where, in general, the percentage of literacy of the entire population, to at the beginning of 1927 it was expressed in 4.6о / о. The average female educational institutions at the beginning of 1928 were 17; 810 girls and women of the indigenous population (Uzbeks and Tajiks) studied there. Further graduations by the Uzbek Women's Institute for the education of new cadres, teachers, will significantly contribute to the quantitative and qualitative growth of schools for girls. The institute, the director of which is an Uzbek candidate of the party, graduating 12 teachers in 26, organized at the same time summer courses for the training of teachers, which in turn graduated one and a half hundred teachers, of which 80 are Uzbek *) • 60 Uzbek women are local students; University. About two hundred Uzbek women receive party education at the Central Asian Communist University and communist schools. Particular attention was paid to the vocational and technical education of the indigenous woman. • The existing 4 female technical schools teach more than two hundred Uzbek and Tajik women, a weaving technical school — more than a hundred. Uzbekistan was previously an exclusively resource base for Russia. The industry created in Soviet Uzbekistan, namely textile and silk-winding, requires the use, mainly, of female labor. directives of the 2nd Congress of Soviets, Uzbekistan in 1926 (on the work of trade unions) was as follows: “Noting the weak participation of women in production, especially from the indigenous population, their low qualifications, living conditions and high female unemployment, to strengthen the involvement of women in production, to improve the qualifications of female labor, by strengthening the registration of women in the brigade factory apprenticeship. To increase the percentage of women in vocational courses, to raise work to improve the living conditions of female workers through the organization of nurseries, kindergartens, etc. Strengthen the promotion of women to Soviet and professional work. ”The implementation of this directive resulted in the involvement of 1,700 Uzbek women in production by the end of 26. and almost three thousand by the end of the 27th. We saw) how fast the entry of Uzbek women into Soviet work is. But the women's trade union movement is also sprouting quite fast. In April 1925, the number of Uzbek trade union women slightly exceeded 700 (Russian women 14,000), but by October of the same year, that is, within 6 months, their number more than doubled, reaching 1,520 (Russians and Tatars, 21,000), and a year later, by October 26, reached 2,000 (Russians and Tatars, 25,000). place also in the design of the highest governing bodies of the trade union movement. So in the Central Committee and the Regional Council of Trade Unions there are 61 workers, or 12 percent of the total composition of the Central Committee and the ISPS. In total, up to 40 thousand women are in party and Soviet work, of which about 8 thousand are communists and almost 6 thousand delegates. is growing at giant strides: in 1925 there were only 202 Komsomol members, in 26 about 1,100. to 8 mouth of 1928, the women's Komsomol of Uzbekistan is numbered almost 15 thousand. In addition to the Central Asian Communist University and the communist schools with hundreds of girls and young women studying in them, the best Komsomol is forged by the Uzbek House of Education, located in Moscow, in the premises of the palace-mansion (b. Ryabushinsky) on Spiridonovka. The house, where 3 people of the family of a millionaire used to live, now freely accommodates up to 360 souls of Uzbek youth of both sexes, making them the best fighters for a bright future for an Uzbek woman. Turning an Uzbek woman from a slave into a full-fledged person, the Soviet government protects her young, still fragile freedom nearby , if necessary, strict protective laws. Murder of a wife is punishable by shooting; forcing to marry, imprisoned for up to 3 years; who married his daughter for a kalym, and who also encroached on the honor of the girl, is imprisoned for 5 years; an attacker on the honor of a woman and accused of pandering loses his freedom for 3 years; refusal of alimony leads to a 6-month imprisonment or "yshtaf" (fine) of 500 rubles. Much work has been done to familiarize women with the basics of Soviet legislation. This work did not pass without a trace In the People's Commissariat of Justice of Uzbekistan, the influx of applications on everyday issues is increasing. There are cases when a dekhkanka; divorced from her husband 5-6 years ago, comes and submits an application for the recovery of part of the property from him. After the re-elections in 1927, the number of women-jurors increased to 2.8 sr * People, mainly Uzbeks. The Commission for Improving the Life of a Woman of Uzbekistan managed to ensure that the law punished not only those who give kalym, but also those who take it. In addition, an amendment was made to the procedural code, according to which the investigation of domestic crimes must be conducted without the victim's statement, which is of great importance for Uzbekistan. The great popularity of the people's courts allowed the government of Uzbekistan to issue a ruling. (at the beginning of 1928) on the liquidation of spiritual (so-called Kazi courts) throughout the Republic ... __. A growing network of legal consultations, thousands of delegates, thousands of administrative and party workers, and behind them the entire state apparatus of Soviet Uzbekistan stand guard over each Looking at the process of liberation of a woman in Central Asia as a whole, you get the impression that the female half of the population of this huge country, as it were, is emerging from oblivion, being born into the world of cheerful work, into a world full of the broadest possibilities.