III. Soviet Bashkiria.
After the brutal reprisal of the insurrectionary movement by tsarist Russia, any noticeable social movement in Bashkiria began only in 1905, when the Bashkir workers took part in strikes. The extreme backwardness of the masses, the insignificance of the proletariat, the aggravation of national and economic relations, the barely outlined stratification of the countryside! —All this could not become the basis for social protest. The agrarian movement in 1905 did not go beyond the felling of forests, waste and refusal of rent, and in some places the seizure of land. The Stolypin planting of the kulaks and the imperialist war, ruining the poor, accelerated the stratification, and nevertheless it was so insignificant that even in 1917 mullahs, village elders and kulaks led almost all political actions. The October Revolution did not immediately bring liberation to the Bashkir people. November 1917 in Bashkiria were the Cossack troops of the general. Dutova (Dutov is a general who played a prominent role in the history of the White Guard adventure in the Urals! And in Siberia). The Kurlatai convened under him formed a government called! The Central Bashkir National Council, which in essence was completely inactive, torn apart by an internal struggle between its opposing elements — bourgeois nationalists, on the one hand, and the poor and revolutionary front-line soldiers — on the other. Meanwhile; in Bashkiria itself, a civil war began. Then, to fight the ever-growing revolutionary movement, bourgeois nationalists proclaim the slogan: "Bashkiria for the Bashkirs", hoping to play in this way on the national feelings of the masses. Kulaks and rich mountain Bashkirs are associated: with the Cossacks and part of the government with Zaki Validov at the head enters into an agreement 'with Dutyu'i: and the Committee of the Constituent Assembly. Com. uch. recognizes an independent Bashkir government and an independent Bashkir army! and "(Validists" start organizing voluntary detachments. However, after the seizure of power by Kolchak, the White Guard policy causes a sharp aggravation of relations between the Bashkirs and the Cossacks. The Bashkir government leaves Orenburg, and in the end Kolchak abolishes the autonomy of Bashkiria and orders the Bashkir troops to obey Dutov. But Orenburg was taken by the Red Army in January 1919. The Bashkir government goes over to the side of Soviet power, the Bashkir detachments open joint actions with the Red Army, and already on March 22, 1919, the All-Russian Central Executive Committee issues a decree On the formation of an autonomous Bashkir SSR. going over to the side of Soviet power, the "Validians" under the guise of narrowly nationalist and religious slogans are trying to stop the revolutionary movement, first by sabotage, and then by open uprisings and guerrilla war. The originality of national and economic relations in the country (neighborhood with the Cossacks, Russian kulaks) and a large number of trained local workers made possible distortions and misinterpretations in attitudes towards the national policy of the sovlast (which, due to the food crisis, exacerbated and prolonged the civil war). Clarification of the basic principles of national and economic policy of the government gradually isolated the kulak groups from the broad masses and the anti-Soviet movement degenerated into banditry, which was finally liquidated by 1922. Only from that time did Bashkiria enter a period of peaceful construction. At present, the Autonomous Bashkir Republic consists of 8 cantons (the canton, approximately, corresponds to the district) - Argayashsky, Belebeyevsky, Birskopo, Zilairovsky, Mesyagutovsky, Sterlitamaksky, Tamyan-Kataysky and Ufa. Volosts in the republic 117. The center is the city of Ufa (84.272 inhabitants). Needless to say, the dominance of the White Guard chieftains, civil war, hunger and banditry; in the end they undermined the already disorganized economy of the country. The union government came to the aid of the impoverished country, supporting its budget with subsidies and striving to improve its economy. The main place in the economy of the ABSSR is occupied by agriculture, which gives 80% of the total production of the country. But the sown area during the years of the revolution has decreased by almost 3 slaves, and only now has it expanded again to its former size. In 1925 it was equal to 2 million dessiatines, which amounted to 76 dessiatines per 100 people. Cultivated, mainly, rye, wheat, oats, millet — their sown area occupies 80% of the total field crop. L General and industrial crops account for only 3%; potatoes, common only in certain parts of the country, are beginning to gain recognition, and their sowing has already reached 4%. There are almost no sowing grasses, since natural used hayfields are P / 8 million dess. With a normal harvest, the production of grain crops gives 43.3 poods per capita. The sown area is growing steadily and is already reaching the pre-war level. The first measure of the Soviet government in the field of agriculture was the equalization of land use, both class and national. Then, in addition to the usual benefits for the poorest farms, increased attention was paid to agro-assistance to the population (at present there are 53 agricultural stations in the ABSSR) and to planned machine-building, since the provision of agriculture with implements is extremely low (until 1930. it is supposed to deliver over 2 thousand tractors). Cattle breeding is the second most important sector of the national economy. In the southeast, it still retains a predominant role in agriculture. Horse breeding, which has been reduced by three times, is recovering more difficult than other branches of cattle breeding, already equal to the pre-revolutionary level. In figures, cattle breeding is expressed as follows (in thousands of heads): horses — 662.9; cattle — 1.313; small ruminants — 2.275.7; pigs - 480.6 (1925); per 100 households - 138.8 horses, 277 head of cattle, 476.6 small, 100.6 pigs. Beekeeping, widespread, with the bead-feeding method, has sharply decreased, and currently it employs 9.7% 'farms. But on the other hand, in these farms, it is not one of the subsidiary trades: but is moving to the first place, switching to the beekeeping system. Gardening is very little developed and fully serves the population of the regions occupied by it only due to the habit of the Bashkir population to vegetables as a food product. However, during the years of the revolution, with a sharp reduction in field sowing, it became more widespread. Forests make up% of the territory and give 19 thousand cubic meters. soot. annual growth of wood at a consumption of 1Z1 / 2 thousand cubic meters. soot. The forest inventory carried out by the government helps forestry to take a large place in the country's economy, but the main attention was paid to the cooperation of the population, since only on this path is the technical progress of villages possible, - households. That the line was drawn correctly is best confirmed by the figures: so on January 1. 1924 in the village. cooperation was * only 2 ° / o farms, on October 1. 1924-8 ° / 0, and on October 1. 1925 - already 20%. Therefore, they are created! and artels io different branches of the economy - so there are 43 butter-making cooperatives with 2399 members, 10 poultry farms with 943 members, 50 beekeepers with 2450 members. Handicrafts are developed most of all in the eastern mountain-forest cantons, where, naturally, woodworking predominates and bast. But cooperation among handicraftsmen is very weak, and only in 1926 a special trade union was formed for the comprehensive organization of handicrafts. The industry of the ABSSR was insignificant and was in its infancy. The number of workers in the eligible industry in 1925-26 barely reached 18,000. The total cost of production in the same year is 41% million rubles. In the first place are metallurgical and distilleries. Nevertheless, the prospects for its development are great, since the ABSSR is rich in minerals, especially iron and gold-copper ores. At present, a course has been taken to revitalize local industry, which will not only raise the country's productive forces, but also create cadres of the industrial proletariat, of which about 1/3 are currently Bashkirs and Tatars. In 2 (recent years, trade has grown in 41/2 times, and the state budget has doubled. In the field of socio-political relations, a sharp change in the Tsosle-October period is provided primarily by the cause of public education. It would be appropriate to cite the following figures: in 1925 the government was spent on the needs of public education 1 p. 40 kopecks,for health care - 49 kopecks, while the administrative costs were only 83 kopecks. Currently, the ABSSR has 1 workers' faculty, 1 institute of public education, 16 technical schools, 10 factory-head. uch-sch and special schools of advanced type. There are 3,700 students in them, of which 17.7 / o Bashkirs and 28.8 / o Tatars. Schools I stage 2.146, II stage - 64 and 14 special, Bashkir schools, 7 preschool houses with a total number of students 156 thousand. In 1924-25 there were 365 schools and educational programs with 42 thousand students, in 1925-26 - 767 schools and centers. Here Bashkirs make up 14о / о, Tatars 36% of students. Half of all reading rooms are Tatar-Bashkir. In addition, out of 6 local newspapers, 2 are published in Bashkir and 2 in Tatar. There is a "Bashkir Scientific Society" in Ufa, which publishes 2 journals. The publishing house "Bashkniga" was opened there since 1922, and at the same time the Bashkir section of the "Central Publishing House of the Peoples of the USSR" operates in Moscow. The reform of the old Arabic alphabet, which did not correspond to the spirit of the Bashkir language, was carried out, Bashkir literature began to be created and, finally, a mobile Bashkir drama troupe was working. Trade unions in the ABSSR numbered 59 thousand people in 1925, of which 50% were workers. 50% of employees. Bashkirs make up 10%, Tatars 13%. As of June 1, 1926, the Bashkir Communist Party consisted of 11 thousand members, of which 15.3% are Bashkirs and 21.7% are Tatars. Bashkirs make up 23% of the Komsomol, Tatars 25.5%. The growth of the party is very great — in the year since 1925 it grew by 53%. The conclusion from all that has been said is that the growth of Bashkir national culture is taking place in all areas. Young Soviet Bashkiria builds councils, learns, creates culture, raises the country's productivity.

IV. Bashkir after the revolution.
Soviet legislation equated women in rights with men. From what has been said in the second part, it is clear how important this was for a Bashkir woman in matters of inheritance, land use, not to mention her marital and social status. But the low socio-economic and cultural level and. the inertia of the masses most of all affects the position of women in the family. Therefore, no matter how great the striving of the Bashkir woman for freedom and knowledge, her emancipation was the most difficult work. We will not repeat everything that has already been said about the general situation of the country at the time of the formation of the ABSSR. We will only add that the absence of a well-functioning apparatus and auxiliary means of work had the most pronounced effect precisely in the work on the female line — the promoted Bashkir women, striving for social work, had neither experience nor knowledge, and the apparatus of the women's department had almost no workers familiar with. local conditions. The so-called "native bias" —t. That is, the latent bourgeois-national chauvinism, which at first impeded Soviet work in Bashkiria, could not help but oppose the women's movement as well. The emancipation of women was interpreted as an undermining of national traditions, as national oppression. Therefore, at first, the work of the instructors of the Obzhenotdel, with the assistance of the first women-social activists, is naturally grouped around large centers. Then it spreads throughout the country, and gradually covers the most distant cantons. As it moves inland, work among women expands and becomes stronger every day. Around the singles, shots of active women grow up, and the following figures are the best confirmation of this. The entire apparatus of the women's department by the end of 1926 consists of 96 people, including 76 volunteers. Thus, of the 117 volosts of the republic, 65 ° / o has already been covered by planned work. The delegate composition is steadily growing from year to year, as the following figures show: 1824-25 ... 7,434 delegations. Of these, 2,934 Tat.-Bashk. 1925-26 "... 9,509" "4.978" "1926- 27 "... 12.030" "9.137" "In them, attention is drawn not so much to the overall growth of the delegate corps, but to the increase in the proportion of Bashkir and Tatar women in the total mass of delegates: in 1924-25 only 39%, in 1925 - 26 - 52%, and in 1926-1926-27 - 76%. The delegate corps of the women's department, as you know, is the main form of constant communication between the apparatus and the masses, its role is enormous, and therefore the given percentages best show that, despite the usual submissiveness of the female masses, there could be no subconscious protest in them. And not surprising; after all, until now the Bashkir woman was a slave, a thing of her master, a man, almost an object of trade. Therefore, a stubborn struggle ensues around the women's movement, in which the growing female self-awareness is opposed not only by old family covenants, but also by the skillfully used authority of the church x) Muslim clergy! and the kulaks are almost entirely religious, at least formally, they are united by the "Spiritual Administration of Muslims of Russia and Siberia" (as they call themselves), which does everything possible to preserve its influence over the most backward strata of the population and keep women on the "righteous path ”, Within the framework of the pre-revolutionary life, and it must be admitted that it has its adherents. Therefore, it is the mullahs who organize around themselves opposition to the women's movement. They turn the inertness or indifference of the masses into an active force, the unwillingness of a man to give up his rights into a protest against the "female dominance", the passivity of a woman who has not yet realized that her old dreams are coming true into a national and religious ideal of mother and wife, and the inevitable even an enlightened Bashkir woman's shyness before a new path — into frightened * humiliation. The clergy are blocked with kulak elements and are trying to oppose their work to the Soviet public. ^ Of course, it would be ridiculous to talk about serious opposition and see danger here; it is clear that the elimination of the "righteous ways" is only a matter of time. Nevertheless, in some places the influence of the mullah is still strong, and the rule of the “old”, “good” Sharia is raging over the woman. This work is developing especially energetically during the pre-election campaign. In order to prevent a woman from participating in public work, the mullahs seek to discredit her candidacy, not abandoning the lowest methods of struggle, up to defaming the candidate's personality with slanderous fabrications. Along with this, the Muslim clergy, adapting to new conditions, extremely changes and reform the former elementary forms of religious agitation; for example, they allow women to enter mosques, organize at the latter some kind of craft courses, circles, and, finally, even provide some material support in the form of religious charity. The wives of the mullahs act independently. Their agitation is extremely strong, as they are well aware of the weaknesses of each woman, her relationship with her family and neighbors. They buy the trust of the dark Bashkir with gifts and attention to her, to her children, often even substantial help in order to later undermine the authority of the Soviet school in cautious bareness and convince the mother of the advantage of the mekteb.In other cases, acting through their husbands, they call out to their national pride, to male authority, indignant against the unheard of "female dominance and licentiousness." There are frequent cases / when a husband, converted by wise agitation, began by returning home, beating his wife half to death, defending his “sacred” rights from “Soviet encroachments”. Accordingly, the work of the women's department is strongly individualized - in addition to leading the movement and the general struggle against the inertia of the masses, also the protection in each individual case of a certain person, whether through moral support or influence on others, or, finally, in especially aggravated clashes (beating by her husband, etc.) - by attracting the attention of the judiciary. To assist in this work, there are legal consultations for women — one for each canton and two for the mountains. Ufa. In general, this work requires a lot of patience, caution and perseverance in order to avoid aggravation in the most backward corners. If it is still true that in some cases a woman, due to her darkness and humiliation, continues to be a slave and voluntarily tolerates her subordinate position, then women who realized their slavery and unlawful arbitrariness over oneself and nevertheless forced to endure them — certainly not.She knows where to look for protection, and therefore it is not so rare when she initiates proceedings against her husband, divorces him or 'achieves an independent position in her own family, demanding the division of property. Having won home independence, the Bashkir woman, step by step, is winning back her participation in the construction of our Soviet reality. We can state that the influence of everyday traditions is still very strong. ' Nevertheless, the woman's desire for activity is growing; it is reflected in the following figures: in 1927 - 3,412 women Bashkir pioneers were elected members of the village councils, 190 - members of the VIK'ov, 24 - KIK'ov, 142 - city councils. Finally, 12 work as chairpersons of village councils. It is enough to recall the recent past in order to understand what a huge shift in the consciousness of the masses was required to realize such a fact as the promotion of a woman to responsible leadership work in her own village, in front of her relatives and friends. The Komsomol, which currently unites more than 2,000 Bashkir Tatar girls, plays a huge role in the upbringing of a Bashkir woman. Its influence as a public organization is colossal. The woman penetrates into all branches of work — in 1926, in the Bashkir courts, 3.082 women of narzas, s. The delegates instruct 322 reading rooms and conduct cultural and educational work in them. In the shop commissions of the Central Regional Committee, women make up 52%. Here it will be appropriate to note the following characteristic fact in cooperative work - meetings of shareholders, meetings of commissioners, shop commissions and cooperation assistance cells give almost 100% of attendance for Bashkir women. Members of educational unions are no longer only adult women, but also adolescents and their percentage of all Gradually, new cadres of female workers are being created — 25% of the students in the Soviet Communist Party schools and volunteer courses are women. In May 1927, a special commission of the Central Committee of the Women's Department "to improve the working and living conditions of women" began work in Bashkiria. The main tasks of the commission are the settlement of issues of women's education, the cooperation of women, the fight against everyday conservatism, the protection of mothers and children, and so on. As we can see, the main purpose of the commission is to facilitate the work of the local women's department. Despite the relatively short period of its existence, 'thanks to the attention and support of the' Bashkir government, the commission was able to expand its work widely, linking it with the work of the women's department. The commission focused its main attention on improving the financial situation of women. For the final liberation of a woman from the yoke of old traditions, there is little development of the community, and little growing self-awareness. Her economic dependence on her husband, on her family, her personal insecurity and the difficulty of finding an independent income — all this deprives a woman of the opportunity to boldly go her own way in cases of conflicts and clashes with her family and the village. Therefore, the cooperation of the female masses and the collectivization of female labor in Bashkiria is of exceptional importance, and here the beginning of the liberation of women from material dependence is laid, not to mention the constant accustoming to the public, to collective work. Cooperation was developing most satisfactorily along the lines of the Oil Union. The Oil Union organized 4 women's artels and purchased 12 libraries for the study of dairy business for a number of circles and agricultural artels. Limited funds and everyday conservatism did not allow the female masses to be widely drawn into cooperation. Nevertheless, the commission has already created 14 poultry associations, of which 4 are composed exclusively of women. Thanks to the insistence of the same commission, NKZem purchased about 400 breeding poultry "for those of the newly organized associations that will involve women in their work." Funds allotted by Kustpromsoyuz were used to purchase machinery and raw materials for four women's artels — two sewing ones, which will employ about 60 women in general, one linen shop in Ufa, and a larger knitwear cooperative in Belebey. Since the lack of knowledge of crafts by the Bashkirs hinders the development of women's labor, the organization and equipment by the commission of the House of the Working Woman of Bashkiria named after Clara Zetkin is of great importance. The house has a dormitory for 20 people, 10 for women and 10 for preschool children. В правила дома входит обязательная ликвидация неграмотности каждой женщины из переменного состава обитательниц дома и попутное обучение какому-нибудь ремеслу. Для облегчения женского домашнего труда в программу сельскохозяйственных школ и техникумов включены вопросы домоводства и в штате НКЗем’а выделен инструктор по домоводству. Этому же содействуют и детские площадки, для детей дошкольного возраста (их 52), так как они, хотя и частично, разгружают женщин от семейных забот.На 1928 г. комиссией предусмотрена организация ряда краткосрочных курсов по молочному делу, птицеводству и козоводству. По линии Нар-компроса намечено устройство женского клуба в одном из кантонов с преобладающим башкирским населением. В г. Темясове приступлено в настоящее время к организации учебно-показательной мастерской по вязанию пуховых платков в среднем на 25-30 чел. По утверждениям местного Куст-промсоюза этой отрасли кустарной промышленности в Башкирии принадлежит большое будущее, вследствие чего комиссией возбуждено ходатайство перед ВСНХ об открытии еще двух учебно-показательных мастерских того же типа на 100 человек.Конечно, всего этого далеко недостаточно—ни количества отраслей и школ, ни размера их. Ограниченность средств, незнание башкирских женщинами самостоятельных и прибыльных ремесел, не дают возможности быстро расширять сеть артелей и кооперативов, облегчающих женщине переход от первичной социальной ячейки-семьи— к более высоким общественным формам.Башкирская республика молода, за ней стоит фактически каких-нибудь 5—6 лет планомерной работы в спокойных условиях, и для этого срока достигнутые результаты огромны. Только благодаря исключитетельной энергии руководства и революционному под’ему масс, проявленному всеми народами Советского Востока, удалось создать ту силу, которую он теперь собой представляет. Советская культура для народов востока является первой, которая, не насилуя национальных особенностей, создавая все возможности для развития национальной культуры, одновременно приобщает их ко всему цивилизованному миру; для женщины—это первая культура, которая открывает широкое поле ее самодеятельности. Впервые башкирская женщина находит отклик своим запросам и стремлениям, защиту своих человеческих прав, и сама может строить свою жизнь. Отсюда понятны становятся ее горячность и жадность к участию в жизни республики, о чем так красноречиво говорят цифры.