1. Brief history of the Volga Tatars
There are two large groups of Tatars on the territory of our Union. One of them, the most significant, is concentrated within the Tatar Republic on the Volga, the other, small, on the Crimean Peninsula in the Crimean Autonomous Republic; (both republics are part of the RSFSR) Of these two Tatar groups, of course, special attention should be paid to the Volga Tatars, or, as they are called, Kazan Tatars, since this more numerous and distinctive group has always been the center and hotbed of the national Tatar culture and Under the heavy pressure of tsarist oppression and Russification, she was able to forge the will to fight for liberation. The ancestry of the Volga Tatars is usually derived from the Turkic tribes who came from Central Asia much earlier than the 10th century and settled on the middle reaches of the Volga. These tribes are known under the name of the Kama-Volga Bulgars. Subsequently, the Finnish tribes, who had lived here before, were added to them, completely submitting to the influence of the stronger Bulgar culture. The Bulgar state was agricultural and commercial in nature, it had fertile soil, fur animals, fish wealth and lay at the junction of large trade routes to the southeast to Persia, Mesopotamia and Central Asia, to the Urals and Siberia, as well as to southwest, to the Dnieper and the Black Sea. Further, by the XIII century, the Bulgar kingdom was captured by a wave of the Mongol flood that spread far to the west. The Mongol tribe — the Tatars — destroyed the capital of the kingdom, the city of Bulgar, but the Bulgar statehood and culture did not disappear, but, on the contrary, absorbed the victors of the Tatars. This is how the Kazan Khanate was formed with a new capital, Kazan. The Muslim Kazan Khanate was a natural transit point and trade intermediary between the growing Moscow principality and the East; Therefore, by the end of the XIV century, there is already a strong and developed trading capital, the representative of which was the Tatar aristocracy: princes, murzas, beks, etc. The wealth of Kazan, accumulated as a result of a developed and brisk transit trade, attracted the attentive gaze of the expanding Moscow state , moving step by step to the north-west: to the free trade cities of Novgorod and Pskov, and to the east: to the Volga and the Caspian Sea. In 1552, Kazan, after a long desperate struggle, was taken by the troops of Ivan the Terrible and an independent and strong khanate became an integral part of Muscovite Rus. Of course, Moscow seized the Kazan Khanate not in order to care about the prosperity and welfare of the Tatar people. The Moscow ruling elite — the boyars — immediately set about unrestrained plunder of the newly conquered country for the purpose of profit. The Tatar population is driven from their ancestral lands to the worst areas, giving way to the winners. Gradually, the process of formation of the Russian landowning aristocracy is under way, ousting the Tatar landowners, who are rushing into the sphere of trade, which is still relatively free. Russian settlement in Tatarstan, just like in other, subsequently captured areas of the East, is under the slogan of spreading Christianity and eradicating Islam. The monasteries and churches that have appeared here, the number of which is growing every year, become hotbeds of Russification (x) policy and oppression of the native Muslim population; at the same time they are large landowners, seizing the best lands and shamelessly exploiting the Tatar peasantry. The history of the tsarist policy in Tatarstan for about 4 centuries is a continuous list of the illegalities of persecution and abuse of the Muslim population. Russian administrators and bishops, especially until the 19th century, systematically practice the forcible conversion of the Tatars to Christianity, the destruction of mosques and the planting of Orthodox churches, offending the religious feelings of Muslims, etc. Of course, this religious fanaticism was only a cover for the true aspirations of Russian colonists, who were trying not to deserve so much "Salvation of the soul", how much to pursue their class, deeply material interests. The greatest burden of the tsarist regime fell on the working masses of Tartary. While the upper classes, through various compromises, often converting to Christianity, bought themselves immunity, creating a group of the Tatar nobility - the support of the existing system - the masses, especially the peasantry, were provided- ') Russification forcible Russification here of the Russian landowning aristocracy, ousting Tatar landowners who rush into the sphere of trade, which is still relatively free. Russian settlement in Tatarstan, just like in other, subsequently captured areas of the East, is under the slogan of spreading Christianity and eradicating Islam. The monasteries and churches that have appeared here, the number of which is growing every year, become hotbeds of Russification (x) policy and oppression of the native Muslim population; at the same time, they are also large landowners, seizing the best lands and shamelessly exploiting the Tatar peasant in. The history of the tsarist policy in Tatarstan for about 4 centuries is a continuous list of the illegalities of persecution and abuse of the Muslim population. Russian administrators and bishops, especially until the 19th century, systematically practice the forcible conversion of the Tatars to Christianity, the destruction of mosques and the planting of Orthodox churches, offending the religious feelings of Muslims, etc. Of course, this religious fanaticism was only a cover for the true aspirations of Russian colonists, who were trying not to deserve so much "Salvation of the soul", how much to pursue their class, deeply material interests. The greatest burden of the tsarist regime fell on the working masses of Tartary. While the upper classes, through various compromises, often converting to Christianity, bought themselves immunity, creating a group of the Tatar nobility — the support of the existing system — the masses, especially the peasantry, were left to the arbitrariness of the tsarist administrators. In Catherine's era, the Russian authorities quite often practiced the unauthorized imposition of natural and monetary taxes on the Tatar peasantry, free exploitation of peasant labor, etc. The downtrodden and intimidated Tatars could not complain about the arbitrariness of the authorities, and anyway it would be useless, since in on the rare occasions when such complaints were filed, they were ignored. In later eras, up to the last days of tsarism, the oppression of the Tatars continued as before, except in slightly modified ways. Most of all, the Russian authorities were afraid of the penetration of the Tatar masses of literacy and education, which would undoubtedly open the eyes of the native population and awaken in it the spirit of protest and struggle against Russian despotism. In their desire to suppress any national identity of the Tatars, Russian administrators tried to drag the Tatars from Muslim schools (madrasah) to Russian schools specially established by the government, where native children could be properly processed in a spirit pleasing to the theorists of Russian chauvinism. To guide this Russification work to the East! and in particular, officials who were educated in Russian orientalist educational institutions were dispatched to Tatarstan. Particularly distinguished in this field was a certain Nikolsky, who developed in detail a plan for staging the Russification work. Nikolsky's plan, reflecting the views of the tsarist bureaucracy on the Eastern peoples as the lowest despised race, involves the establishment of a special newspaper in the Tatar language called "Bahr-ul-Akhbar". (Sea of ​​news), which could distract the Tatar masses from nationalist sentiments and process them in a direction beneficial to Russia. This kind of "agitprop" of the tsarist bureaucracy in Tatarstan, however, gave very little results. On the contrary, the system of religious oppression, russification and the forcible imposition of Orthodoxy, strengthened among the Tatars loyalty to Islam and the desire for rapprochement with other Muslim peoples. At the same time, revolutionary sentiments, spontaneous discontent and anger arose among the peasant masses of Tatarstan, who were infinitely oppressed by the willful administrators and exploited by the landowners. Therefore, the Tatar peasantry responded so quickly and sympathetically to popular uprisings against tsarism, which seized the Volga region. So it was under Stepan Razin, so it was in the Pugachev era. Popular unrest in certain areas or villages took place at the end of the last century; such are, for example, the riots that broke out in 1878 in several villages of the Spassky and Kazan districts, as a result of the Russification measures of the authorities and extortions from the kulaks and landowners. As a rule, Russian officials liquidated such outbreaks in a quick and tried-and-true way: a punitive expedition and flogging until they lost consciousness. As we have already noted, after the Russian conquest, the Tatar land nobility in the majority rushed into the sphere of trade, mainly intermediary between European Russia and Central Asia. Thus, by the end of the 19th century, there was already a fairly significant trading bourgeoisie in Kazan, and the accumulated capital was gradually invested in local industry, giving rise to a real factory proletariat. The Tatar big bourgeoisie and the higher Tatar intelligentsia that emerged from it were in opposition to tsarism and its national policy. However, this dissatisfaction went very close, confined to the framework of the Cadet party. In the history of Tatarstan since the time of the Russian conquest, this extreme moderation of the upper classes of the Tatar population can be traced several times. Even under Pugachev, the Tatar merchants *, generally opposed to the government, frightened by the growth of the peasant movement, actively began to help the authorities suppress the revolt. In the era of the 1905 revolution ', while the Tatar workers, led by the Bolshevik Party, took part in the struggle against tsarism, the Tatar bourgeoisie, aristocracy and clergy expressed "patriotic feelings" the throne. Finally, after October, when Kazan was in the hands of the White Guard and Czechoslovak troops, the Tatar bourgeoisie was with them. Nevertheless, the slogans of the October Revolution prevailed in Tatarstan, the Tatar masses followed the revolution and the Kazan province of the Russian Empire became the Tatar Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic.

2. Soviet Tatarstan
The Tatrespublika was formed on May 27, 1920 from parts of the territory of the provinces: Kazan, Ufa, Samara and Ulyanovsk (former Simbirsk). The territory of the newly formed republic covers an area of ​​65.587 sq. klm. Of the total population of its equal to 2.925.000 people, the Tatars make up 1.306.242 people (it should be noted that several million Volga Tatars live in various localities outside the Tatrespublika); followed by Russians at 1.205.814, Bashkirs — 139.858, Chuvash — 183.896. Administratively, the Tatrespublika is divided into 12 districts, the so-called cantons: Arsky — 19 volosts, Laishevsky — 3 volosts, Yelabuzhsky — 7, Buinsky — 7, Tyutyushsky — 7, Menzelinsky — 3, Chistopolsky — 17, Mamadyshsky — 9 , Spassky — 8, Bugulminsky — 14, Sviyazhsky — 8, Chelninsky — 11. The republic is mainly an agricultural country. Of the 2.925.090 of its population, the rural population is 2.659.400 people ', i.e. more than 90%, with the bulk of the Tatar working population concentrated in agriculture. The middle Volga region, within which Tatarstan is located, lies in the transition zone from a strip of forests to a steppe strip. Here, fields and meadows alternate with huge and dense forests and groves; prevailing trees in forests: spruce, fir, pine, birch, aspen, elm, ash. From | grain crops mainly grow here, rye, wheat and oats; flax and hemp are widespread industrial crops. The Soviet government of Tatarstan first of all set about giving land to the Tatar and Russian peasants, who suffered severely from land shortages in the pre-revolutionary era .. However, the years of the imperialist and civil war, which severed a huge number of workers and undermined the welfare of the peasant economy, significantly reduced the sown area of ​​Tatarstan. The domination of the White Guards, the Constituents, the Czecho-Slovaks, etc., who shamelessly robbed the peasants, and the kaleidoscopic change of regimes, had an especially hard impact on the Tatar countryside. Alongside! with this in 1921 the Volga region experienced an almost unprecedented crop failure. As a result, a terrible year of famine begins in Tatrespubly-ke, which wrested a colossal number of victims from among the local peasant population, especially the poor Tatar population. The famine year further undermined the peasant economy already destroyed by the war. In 1922. The sown area of ​​the republic was 1,031,765 dessiatines, decreasing by 42p / 0 against 1920, and by 6O ° / o against 1916. In addition, the peasantry had almost no seeds for sowing, which threatened a further reduction in the sown area and, consequently, a recurrence of famine. Only thanks to energetic measures taken with due speed by the Soviet government, Tatarstan was saved from the troubles that threatened it and began to gradually recover from the troubles already experienced. Already by the end of 1924 the sown area from 1.031.765 in 1920 increased to 1.789.671 dess. Along with this, peasant implements are improving, and the number of workers and cattle is increasing, which has become extremely thinner in previous years. Now the Republic of Tatarstan is gradually striving for further intensification of agriculture. We see already developed agronomic assistance, experienced nurseries, demonstration state farms, a number of measures in the field of reclamation, a gradual transition from three-field to multi-field crop rotation, sorting of seeds for sowing, etc. In recent years, the spread of truck farming has been noticed; before, almost exclusively the Russian population was engaged in gardening, but now it is developing among the Tatars, taught by the bitter experience of a hungry year. Along with this, technical crops have made a step forward. There is no doubt that the intensification of agriculture is proceeding at a somewhat slower pace, the reasons for this lie in those forms of land management that have been inherited from the past, such as a strip of land, far-land, small-land, etc. hinder the transition to multi-field. But on the other hand, the successes already achieved and the growth of the well-being of the peasantry during the years of Soviet power give full reason to hope for a quick overcoming of these difficulties. The industry of Tatrespu is concentrated mainly in Kazan; there are tanneries, soap-making, chemical factories, sewing and textile factories. In the cantons, the flour-grinding industry is predominantly developed, numbering about 100 mills. The gradual development of the industry of Tatarstan and the increase in its production, observed during the years of the revolution, contribute to the expansion of the personnel of the local industrial proletariat. In 1925, the number of workers employed in production was 6,572 people, of which 24.38о / о were Tatars. In this way, The process of industrial development of the region is gradually drawing the Tatar peasantry into production more and more, thereby undermining the roots of the old life of the Tatar village, rebuilding the family structure and the position of the Tatar woman in a new way. The industry of the Republic of Tatarstan is mainly in the hands of the state; private capital predominantly develops activities in the field of small trade, which has long been widespread among the Tatars. The policy of the Soviet government of Tataria in relation to the Tatar population and its culture is a clear opposite of the traditional policy of Russian tsarism. Instead of fierce Russification, religious fanaticism, and disdain for the Tatars as a lower race, we now have an attentive and careful attitude towards the Tatar national culture and its further development. The Tatar language, formerly in the pen, has now become the state language, along with Russian. Tatar children receive education at school in their native language and are gradually freed from the power of the Muslim clergy, races. expanding their horizons and knowledge. Currently, in Soviet Tatarstan, a number of publications are published in the Tatar and Russian languages, covering the most important issues of politics, Soviet construction, the national economy of the republic, the life of the derenny, the trade union movement, work among women, etc. Tatar Communist University in Kazan, including the Tatars and Russians and representatives of national minorities, prepares qualified workers for local administrative institutions, public organizations and economic agencies who, being connected by thousands of threads with the working masses of the republics, will successfully lead the cause of socialist construction .. Soviet Tatarstan from the era of oppression and national humiliation is moving to a new system and a new way of life.


