1. General outline of the Oirat Autonomous Region
Oirat Autonomous Region, part of the RSFSR, is located in Altai, in Western Siberia. Its neighbors are: from the south - the Kyrgyz Republic, from the east - Mongolia. In the north and west, the borders are the Siberian provinces. Altai, a vast mountainous country, with a total length of approximately 90,000 square meters. kilometers, it is like a frozen giant lake, on which mighty stone waves rose in all directions. These are the Kholzun and Sailyugem ridges with countless spurs, here called squirrels (the main ones: Katun squirrels with the Belukha summit, Yuzhno-Chuiski squirrels, Terekta squirrels, etc.); The largest peaks, rising to a height of 10-15,000 feet, that is, above the line of eternal snows, feed a number of glaciers and give rise to many rivers, of which the main — the Katun and the Biya — make up, at the confluence, one of the largest rivers in Siberia — the Ob. The whole country has a typically mountainous character: peaks and ridges are interspersed with valleys or mountain steppes, abound in fast rivers, lakes (the largest is Lake Taurus), sometimes giving majestic pictures and, according to many travelers, in its beauty is in no way inferior to the famous Alps ... The slopes of the ridges are overgrown with forests, consisting almost exclusively of larch, arching its gigantic branches from the bottom up. Under the protection of trees, the grass rises in a powerful green carpet, sometimes reaching the height of a person. The forests are inhabited by animals typical of the Siberian taiga, from bears to deer and squirrels. The region is very rich in minerals (gold, jasper, coal, iron and silver-lead ore). Altai is one of the localities where traces of primitive mankind have been preserved. There are remains of ancient mining and smelting works here. Through the Altai Dodans, which lay on the routes from Asia to Europe, waves of tribes poured, leaving behind many burial mounds. In antiquity, Altai was inhabited by some kind of blond race, probably related to the Finns and ousted by the Turkic tribes in the 6th century. The Mongol conquests of the 13th century, in which the Turks took an active part, finally secured the land for the Turkic peoples who formed an independent state in Western Siberia, after the weakening and fall of the Mongols. The latter fell only under the blows of the Russian colonial conquest, which began in the 16th century and continuously covered more and more areas in Siberia. The conquest of Altai proper began, however, only at the beginning of the 18th century and was dictated by the interests of predatory industrialists who discovered copper ore here. From that time on, the region attracted "special attention" to tsarist Russia and began to quickly colonize, mainly with the help of exiles. For the local population, truly terrible times have come. Not to mention the "legal" robbery and arbitrariness practiced by officials and military detachments, the merciless exploitation of the local population began with the help of proven means of commercial predation (buying up valuable goods for penny trinkets, a system of usury unrestrained by any limits, soldering, etc.) . P.). The uprisings with which the Altai responded to the oppression 'led to the fact that they ceased to have any "rights". Russian immigrants, according to one of the eyewitnesses, “settle on their lands, climb into auls with weapons in their hands, burn yurts, and steal herds. And the savage doesn't even know who to turn to for help. The authorities rarely visit these regions, and if they do, they catch up with unaccountable horror on the Altai; as soon as he hears the sound of a bell and in a moment, abandoning his horse on the way, runs to hide in the forest until the postal troika passes its places. ”As a result of this disgusting policy, which doomed the local population to poverty and extinction and sought to oust and replace it Russian settlers, the picture of the national composition of the region changed dramatically. At present, the Voyrat Autonomous Republic has about 90,000 people, of which the Oirats account for only .41.6 o / o, Russians 54.9%, Kirghiz 2.6 and the remaining 0.9%. The self-name of the Oirats is somewhat descriptive, since this group includes the Altai, Telengits, Teleuts, etc. However, the long-term cohabitation, or rather the common bondage of tsarist Russia, was created from all these tribes such a homogeneous whole that the above division gets an artificial character. In general, the Oirats can be considered tribes of the Turkic race, despite the fact that the name itself is of Mongolian origin (Oirats are Western Mongols). ' 'Let us now turn to the current economic state of the region. Let's make a reservation from the very beginning: the figures below characterize the economy of the region as a whole. And given the sharp division in the economic way of life that exists between the Russian, predominantly sedentary agricultural, and the native, almost exclusively cattle-breeding-nomadic population, these figures, of course, cannot be distributed simply in proportion to their number. Overwhelming mass new products fall on the first. -On the other hand, the data on the number of livestock should be changed in the direction of slightly increasing the actual figures for the second. Unfortunately, we do not have accurate information on the distribution of all agricultural products and implements between national groups. So, with a total sown area of ​​20.3 thousand dessiatines, the total harvest of grain crops (rye, wheat, barley, oats, buckwheat, millet ) is expressed in an amount of approximately 1.250.000 poods, or about 13 poods per capita. Livestock (in thousands of heads) is considered: horses — 75, cattle — 110, small — 200, pigs — 17, or for every 100 households: horses — 425, cattle — 625, small — 1,100, pigs — 100. In order to somewhat revive these figures for the Oirat population, let us try to sketch out a diagram of the household structure of an ordinary Oirat. The main and most common Oirat dwelling among the poor is the conical yurtal hut made of poles covered with bark. There are windows in this building, called "alanchik". no, but a wooden shield serves as a door. A hole is cut at the top for smoke outlet. In winter, "alanchik" is covered with manure or snow, since otherwise the temperature in it, even if a continuous fire is maintained, is unbearable. Some step forward in comparison; with "alanchik" is "kerego" —the same hut with lattice wooden walls covered with thick felt. Although felt is better than bark, it protects from coloia -! And in "kerego" in winter, sleep without undressing. This type of buildings, borrowed from the Kirghiz or the Mongols, is common among the more prosperous; a wooden shield replaces skin or leather as a door. There is also a third type of buildings, however, which has spread only very recently: this is already a kind of hut — a wooden blockhouse, about human height, covered from above with a conical roof made of poles or bark. The hearth in all dwellings is of the most primitive structure and usually consists of a clay slab, on which a fire is made. In the absence of windows, the yurt is illuminated either by a wide-open door, or by the light of the hearth. The interior decoration fully corresponds to this simplicity of construction. All furniture consists of pack bags, standing right on the ground along the walls and replacing our wardrobes and chests of drawers. The richer the owner, the more sum he has. A bed is built into the sums, sometimes with a piece of cloth for the well-to-do. On the floor in front of the hearth hide. The walls are also hung with skins, guns, various hunting tools, food supplies, etc. On the wall opposite the entrance there are fetishes, and in front of them is a rope with rags in honor of deceased ancestors, who, according to religious beliefs, protect the contentment of families. The yurt is divided into two parts: to the left of the entrance — male, to the right—; women and children. In such a dwelling, the Oirat spends all the time free from activities, the main of which are cattle breeding and hunting. The smoke from the hearth spreads all over the yurt, spirals the breath, blinds the eyes, and settles in thick soot on the walls. Dirt takes on staggering dimensions: Oirat does not know | completely using soap and towels and only occasionally pours water on his hands and face, then drying them in front of the fire. Piles of manure accumulate near the yurt. In this almost absolutely antihygienic atmosphere, all kinds of parasites are incredibly developing: they even force the usual Altaian to leave their home and move to a new one. And it should be noted that this does not happen rarely. And if we add to this all kinds of diseases, and especially epidemics, which, of course, find extremely favorable conditions for spreading, the picture becomes even more bleak. Among the diseases spreading in a wide wave around the edge, it is necessary to highlight syphilis, brought here by Russian settlers, which plays an important role in the physical weakening and even extinction of the indigenous population. The clothes of the Oirats-men, which, among other things, they like to paint with bright colors (red boots, yellow hat, etc.), consists of a long shirt; and short, tied at the knees, trousers. In cold weather, a woolen robe with wide sleeves ("chokpen") is worn on top, and in winter a short fur coat ("yachi") made of wild goat skins, sometimes with wool outside, and the same boots. On the head they wear round colored leather (yellow with a red bottom) hats, trimmed with a lamb band, or fur hats. Teenage girls, and sometimes women, wear horse skins over shirts and pants. Typical for Altai women's clothing is "chegedekh" - a special sleeveless cape in blue. It is worn, however, only married. The headdress is the same as that of men — a round red-yellow hat with a lamb band. Children usually go completely naked. The food is mainly dairy and meat, like all nomadic pastoralists. Favorite national food "tergom", lamb intestines stuffed with blood and cereals. Favorite drink - kumis, the stock of which is almost always kept in each yurt in a special bag called "arkyt". The vast majority of Oirats are cattle.dy. Agriculture is spreading extremely slowly, and only a comparatively insignificant part is engaged in it, using the most primitive tools (hand plow) and leading agriculture in the most backward forms. This is to a large extent explained, undoubtedly, by the seizure of the best lands by the Russian settlers and the displacement of the native population into territories that are inconvenient for agriculture. Be that as it may, the process of transition of the Oirats to a settled way of life, although slowly, is taking place; so now it is no longer possible to speak of a purely nomadic way of life. In a number of cases, life becomes semi-sedentary or even sedentary, and if many Oirats move from place to place, then mainly in the form of a change of winter quarters and summer camps, already firmly attached to one or another camp. In addition to supervising herds, which takes up relatively little time, the Oirat is engaged in hunting, fishing, beekeeping and collecting various kinds of hazelnuts and grass roots, which are often used for food. The Oirat spends all his free time at home, sitting by the hearth and smoking tobacco from a long pipe (a pipe and a tobacco pouch tucked into the belt are an indispensable accessory for the clothes of every Oirat, even women), accepting neighbors, or, conversely, he goes to guests to a neighbor. And if some kind of celebration takes place in a circle with a radius of up to 50 versts — a wedding, a funeral, a sacrifice — the entire male population gathers there to eat meat, drink araka (local moonshine; vodka made from milk) and kumis and see friends. Only women and children then remain in the deserted district ails (Oirat division). According to their religious beliefs, the Oirats are shamanists. The whole world, according to these beliefs, is inhabited by a number of good and evil spirits, respectively led by Ulgen (a good deity who created the earth and laid it on three whales in the sea), and Erlik (an evil deity, the source of all evil for man). Considering himself surrounded by all kinds of hostile spirits, the oirat brings them a propitious sacrifice for every step associated with difficulties. This sacrifice once consisted of a ram. With the passage of time, the Oirat learned to deceive the spirits, stuffing the lamb skin with stones, and leaving the meat for himself. Recently, the share of the spirits, probably due to the impoverishment of the population, only got stones. A number of difficult crossings through mountain streams or dangerous trees are marked by heaps of stones, piled up by the oi-rat who safely avoided danger. Unfortunately, not all spirits are ready to be satisfied with such a gift, and especially those with whom the “kams” (Oirat shamans) deal. And since in the conditions of the Oirat reality, the kams are almost the only "doctors" (the disease, according to the beliefs of the Oirats, is caused by the invasion of a person by evil spirits, with which only the kam can fight), it is clear that they are not satisfied with the "stone" fee : Christianity, zealously spread by Orthodox missionaries among the Oirats, did not receive success. If they had a certain number of baptized, then their Christianity was purely formal, but in essence they remained the same shamanists as their unbaptized brethren. Unless the composition of the spirits was replenished by Orthodox saints, but the priest began to play the role of a kama with peculiar methods of magic (church service, sacraments, etc.). However, even such a purely outward acceptance of Orthodoxy was not widely spread among the Oirats, although the missionaries resorted to increase the number of "converts" to such, for example, methods as the prohibition to pray to the "pagan gods" at a distance of 5 versts from the village, in which one Orthodox native was born. A feature of the social community of the Oirats is, the tribal life, of course, has already undergone significant changes. The main economic base of the clan system is “Communal cattle breeding with common clan ownership of herds no longer exists. The family is the economic unit of the economy. However, the family life * has been preserved in a number of customs and vestiges. In a sense, it can be argued that the modern social-class division of the population is largely due to the clan structure. The fact is that the tsarist administration, in its desire to reduce the administrative overheads for collecting "yasak," the colonial tribute that it levied on the native population, resorted to the services of zaisans, tribal elders. Naturally, the latter, combining in their person the administrative, judicial and economic management of the clan, were able to seize a significant part of the economic wealth of the region during the collapse of the clan economy, not to mention the fact that they were enriched for a number of years due to the appropriation of part of the "yasak" collected by them for the Russian administration. Besides the management that has kept! its tribal organization, survivals of the tribal system can be undoubtedly established in a number of customs, mainly concerning the position of women. However, we will talk about this ““ in detail below. Now we will only note 'that. The generic life had a very a great influence on the servile, almost enslaving state in which the Oirats find a woman. The description of the life of the native Oirat population that we have given refers mainly to the Altaians. The rest of the Oirat peoples - Telengits, Teles, Teleuts, etc., differ from them in their way of life, customs and beliefs only in insignificant local details. Such are, for example, the peculiarities of wedding ceremonies, accompanied by special slander among the Telengits, or some peculiar forms of clothing among the Teleuts. In addition, different groups of the population differ from each other in their economic status. So, the Teleuts already mentioned by us, living in the vicinity of the main center of the Oirat region, Ulaly, have switched to a sedentary lifestyle and are engaged in agriculture. In this regard, Russian influence becomes especially noticeable on them, affecting the way of life, and in the forms of buildings, and in the cut of clothing, which are already losing their national characteristics. But if we exclude these inevitable differences, the diagram of the everyday life of an Altaian sketched above is typical for the entire region.