1. General outline
Yakutsk Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic occupies the northeastern corner of Siberia, with borders from the north - the Arctic Ocean, from the west, south and east of the province: Yenisei, Irkutsk, Transbaikal, Amur, Primorsk and Kamchatka. According to the surface structure, the region can be divided into two parts: the southern, which is a plateau surrounded on all sides by mountain ranges, and the northern, lower, covered with tundra and swamps and gradually 'lowering towards the Arctic Ocean. Lowlands stretch along the lower reaches of rivers and along the sea coast. There is also an extensive lowland along the middle reaches of the river. Lena and along its tributary Vilyuyu. Between the Lena River, which crosses Yakutia in half in the direction from south to north, and the eastern coast, the Stanovoy Range stretches, giving in the north several lateral spurs, the largest of which is Verkhoyansk. Yakutia is very rich in rivers and lakes: over 2,000 rivers and streams and tens of thousands of lakes are counted here. The most important waterway is the Lena River with its tributaries Aldan, Olekma and Vilyui. Its length is about 7,000 kilometers, with which it is navigable for about 4,500 kilometers. The latter circumstance is extremely important for Yakutia, because it is completely devoid of railways, and the lack of roads is the main and most serious illness of the region. The Lena, like all the other Yakut rivers, flows into the Ice .. An extremely harsh, sharply continental climate makes Yakutia one of the coldest regions in the world. Such severe frosts, as here, do not happen anywhere else. The coldest place on the globe is in the vicinity of the city of Verkhoyansk (on the Yana River), where frosts reach 70 ° C. But winter is very severe throughout the entire territory: rivers freeze in early October and remain under the ice for more than 200 days, and sometimes ice reaches fathoms in thickness, a1 lakes freeze to the bottom. Only in the coastal strip adjacent to the ocean does the climate soften somewhat. The cold is well tolerated by the population1 and by animals due to the almost complete windlessness. A short summer *, which begins with strong winds, is relatively very hot, giving sharp fluctuations in temperature: the daytime heat reaches the summer temperature of the middle zone of the European part of the RSFSR and even the Ukrainian SSR, alternating, however, with cold nights with frequent frosts. The duration of the summer is 2–2Yyr months and it is quickly * replaced by rainy and foggy autumn. Vegetation, the edges correspond to its polar position. The winding northern part is * a swamp desert — tundra, covered with lichens, mosses and low-growing shrubs. To the south, the tundra passes into the taiga, that is, in wooded areas, mainly consisting of larch, to which, as we move further south, are admixed with fir, spruce, cedar, birch, pine. Various berries, typical for Golovin, grow abundantly, and the collection of tribute - "yasaka" - a deplorable chronicle of the open and continuous robbery of the local population, accompanied by incredible atrocities and violence, began. Some of the blackest pages of the colonial policy of tsarist Russia are inscribed in the history of Yakutia, with uprisings and pacifications, with cutting out tongues and ears, gouging out eyes, hanging them by the ribs, burying living creatures in the ground and continuous robbery of greedy predators, striving to master, mainly, furs. A whole stream of officials, merchants and adventurers of all kinds poured here in the pursuit of profit; looking, in most cases, at their stay only as a way to get rich, they tried to squeeze out everything possible from the population through violence or through1 trade, in which alcohol was one of the main commodities and one of the main ways was to get the population drunk. the region the tsarist government begins to exile political "criminals", probably in the expectation that the harsh climate and living conditions will play the role of an executioner for the revolutionaries they hate. The first to be exiled were the Decembrists, then the "Karakozovtsy", the People's Will and, finally, a number of modern revolutionaries (V. Vilensky-Sibiryakov, V. P. Nogin, G. I. Petrovsky, Yu. Steklov, E. Yaroslavsky, etc.). This link partly had a beneficial effect on the country, for the exiles strove to get closer to the local population, to study the region and to take part in the education of the masses, although, on the other hand, the simultaneous exile to Yakutia of the scum of society from the criminal, which terrorized the population and corrupted a considerable number of natives , was a scourge for the population Speaking about Yakutia as a country of exile, one cannot fail to mention the famous Yakut dramas of 1889 (the murder of Gurevich, Mukhanov, etc.) and 1904 ("Romanovskoe sitting"), during which political exiles organized resistance to the tsarist executioners, who suppressed them with bloody measures. These dramas had a well-known echo of the jailers, another of the exiled revolutionaries. The Great October Revolution opened a new era for Yakutia. Having experienced a civil war together with the whole of Siberia, it suffered greatly from the destructive activities of the White Guard gangs, for as a result of the country's isolated situation and Japan's active support, there was no lym managed to survive on its territory! until 1924, hindering socialist construction: the decree of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee on the formation of the Yakutsk Autonomous Region !!! The Soviet Socialist Republic was published on April 27, 1922, but only 1924 can be considered the beginning of national liberation and systematic economic recovery. The wounds inflicted on Yakutia by the White Guard movement have not yet healed, and this, as well as the extreme difficulty of communications, must be borne in mind when we talk about the work of Soviet power in Yakutia and its results. At present, the YASSR has the same Soviet administration. (from the Central Executive Committee and the Council of People's Commissars to the Volispod-Kom and the Village Council), as the rest of the Soviet republics. It consists of 7 districts (Yakutsky, Olekminsky, Vilyuisky, Bulunsky, Verkhoyansky, Kolymsky and Tungiro'-Aldansky) with the main center (administrative and commercial) in Yakutsk (according to the 1923 census — 10.053 inhabitants). Districts are divided into uluses (volosts), and the latter into naslegi (villages, villages). As we noted above, the Yakuts are the main population. Populating mainly the southern part of Yakutia, they represent the main mass of the rural, sedentary and semi-sedentary population and are engaged in cattle breeding: and partly in agriculture. According to the data for 1925, the total area under crops is 30.6 thousand dessiatines: it is so insignificant that there are only 6.1 poods of cereals per capita. According to the data for the same year, the number of livestock is as follows (in thousands of heads): horses — 112, cattle — 456.9, small — 0.6, pigs — 0.9. Thus, for every 100 farms (in total, according to the data of 1924, there were 55,000 farms in the republic) there are 203.6 horses, 430.7 cattle, 1.1 small and 1.6 pigs. These figures show the cattle-breeding, mainly, bias of the Yakut economy. It should also be noted his beggarly state. The latter will become obvious if we take into account that the Yakut cow gives the maximum, and then only in the summer, from 12 to 15 pounds of milk, usually not more than 6-7 pounds per day. In addition, an incredibly high mortality rate of young animals should be noted, reaching in some places up to 80о / о (on the Chona River). Thus, a relatively high percentage of the farm's provision with livestock, in reality, does not mean its economic stability. And if we add to this the greatly increased, due to the cost of transport, the price of various kinds of industrial products due to the cut off from the market of manufactured goods and the difficulty of marketing, then it becomes clear the need for subsidiary trades, which the population is engaged in, mainly in the form of hunting and fishing. As a general conclusion, it can be emphasized that the Yakut individual economy, with primitive methods of production and the extremely complicated lack of communication systems for the system of commodity exchange, drags out a miserable existence. The living conditions of the average Yakut cattle breeder give a truly horrifying picture. In most cases, the dwelling is a yurt, a log structure with sloping walls, plastered with clay and earth, with low ceilings that do not allow a person of average height to straighten. The yurt is connected to the khoton, i.e. with a cowshed, and often even has one move for both humans and cows. According to Dr. Schreiber, head of the Vilyui detachment of the Yakut expedition of the Academy of Sciences, these premises "cannot be called otherwise than burial grounds." Although manure is removed from livestock every day, it accumulates here outside the walls of the yurt, forming whole mountains that are burned in the summer. All natural functions are also performed by a person directly by the zagsten of the yurt, and dogs usually eat feces. The air in the yurt itself is incredible (but heavy, because urine is absorbed into the soil and forms vapors that easily seep through the log partition separating the khoton from the living quarters. In a number of cases, even a partition is missing. In this atmosphere, until the instruction of the same doctor Schreiber, “a fresh person becomes dizzy and gets vomiting, movements.” Bunks are arranged in the yurt, partitioned off into several compartments by boards or horse skins. that in the summer time (no longer than 3-4 months), the population usually moves to lighter rooms and lives in somewhat better sanitary conditions.On the other hand, a fairly significant part of the Yakuts, especially sedentary ones, borrowed from the Russian settlers the nature of their buildings, so that Yakuts often live in Russian-type huts. The outer clothing of a Yakut (sleep) is usually made of horse or calf skin, and < wear it with fur inside, often directly on the naked [body. The more prosperous use fabrics on a fur lining for the manufacture of this garment. In addition, the Yakuts, both men and women, wear leather pants and fur boots. “On the road in winter they put on a doha, fur up .. * Some of the Yakuts, however, have already switched to Russian dress, and the process of this transition continues and Now. The main food for the population is provided by dairy products. But the breeding of dairy cattle has a relatively recent past, and the Yakuts have still retained the custom of eating horse meat and drinking kumis, which is their favorite food, which is available, however, only for the more prosperous part of the population. In addition, fish is eaten, which is eaten boiled or fried without; salt, and frozen in winter. Bread often, especially among the poor or in hungry years, replaces pine bark, pre-dried, dried, fried over the fire and crushed into flour. Of course, there is no need to talk about the nutritional value of “bread” made from this kind of flour. - note also the religious ideas of the Yakuts, representing a mixture of primitive beliefs — shamanism — with ritual Orthodoxy, into which they were forcibly converted in the 19th century. These beliefs have a great influence in everyday life, manifesting themselves mainly in the treatment of diseases. All diseases, according to these beliefs, originate from evil spirits infiltrating a person, the struggle with which must be waged with the help of shamans, powerful sorcerers, who drive out or appease these spirit-islands. All phenomena are also explained by the presence in the world of spirits, evil and good, waging a struggle with each other and constantly interfering in human life. Shamans are intermediaries in relations between people and spirits. (It is interesting to note that female shamans are generally considered more powerful than male shamans.) The beliefs and rituals of Christianity, in fact, did not affect the religious world-contemplation of the Yakuts at all, adding only to the mass of gods the Russian saints (“ There are many gods, but the main one is Nin kola ”). The ideas of the Christian god merged with the representatives of the "aiy-toyon", the main god who stands at the head of all spirits and created the earth. As for the social structure of the Yakuts, then. it has a number of peculiar features. In the conditions of the cattle-breeding and hunting economy, the Yakuts still partially retained the remnants of the tribal system. (To illustrate this clearly, let us point out that in the resolution of the 3rd session of the YCIK of the second convocation of September 1, 1924, on the equalization from childbirth. ”It must be said, however, that with the increase in the role of cattle in the cattle-breeding economy of the Yakut, (the beginning of the emergence of individual farms was laid and the decomposition of the clan into smaller production cells was determined. Horse breeding The consumption of horse meat for food, which the Yakuts did not and do not know how to procure for future use (dried, dried, salted), required the accumulation of relatively large groups of the population and caused a herd economy with common property on livestock and pastures. at the moment, due to the predominant role of cattle in cattle breeding yakut, called as its relatively larger. in comparison with the horse's utility and the development of market relations, the economic basis of the tribal system has been undermined, and we have in Yakutia a number of individual farms (families) of the small-capitalist type. The clan structure has survived in a number of everyday relationships, mainly in the customs that regulate the daily life of the Yakut. These customs include the remnants of a community of food, forcing, for example, a Yakut to share with neighbors the meat of a deer killed in a hunt or a slaughtered bull, the right, first of all, to buy hay and food * from relatives, the obligatory support of poor relatives. The legacy of the clan system should include the economic enrichment of toyons, former clan princelings. This enrichment was especially facilitated by the policy of the Russian conquerors, in search of a decrease in administrative costs, which adapted the toyonat to fiscal purposes. The collection of yasak (tribute) was often entrusted to them, and part of it, of course, went to strengthen their economic power. With the disintegration of the clan economy, the toyons, using both the moral authority consecrated by clan traditions and the support of the Russian administration, naturally increased their economic advantages. This led to a strong stratification of the Yakut population, creating, on the one hand, an economically powerful class of kulaks (toyons), who seized the best plots, and a class of landless or landless poor people who were forced to farm for the rich. The presence of a strong kulak element partly determined the long-term nature of the civil war in Yakutia, for the toyons, having behind them both clan traditions and economic domination, often led the main middle-poor mass of the population. The years of the civil war are behind them. The Soviet government, which had already carried out the land redistribution, firmly took control of the country into its own hands, strengthening the economic positions of the poorest population. But it faces the task of not only combating the kulaks, but also the general1 economic subsistence of the country, complicated by its isolation from the rest of the RSFSR, impassable roads and disunity, the absence of industry, except for handicraft,and the cultural backwardness of the population, using primitive means and methods of production. If we add here that the practice of tsarist Russia completely ignored the education of the people and that the literacy of the population is expressed in only 2o / o, then the magnitude of the tasks facing us will be revealed on its present enormous scale. It should be noted, however, that the spontaneous craving of the labor! population to a way out, a difficult situation, and a healthy class instinct are a solid basis for the organizational reorganization of the economic and social life of the republic. Already at the time of the first establishment of Soviet power, mass conferences of the poor broke out in waves throughout the entire region, meeting continuously for 15-20 days. The activity of the Yakut population is great, and its energy does not weaken in difficulties. This is the key to success.