1. General outline of the region and population
Mari belong to the peoples of the Finnish tribe. Their former name, Cheremis, was left by them after the revolution as alien and not accepted among the Mari. The autonomous region of the Mari people, formed in 1921, included Krasnokokshaisky and Kozmodemyanovsky u. at. former Kazan province; parts of the Iranian and Urzhum y. at. Vyatka lips .; and part of the Nizhny Novgorod province. These areas are the main center of the Mari settlements. In addition, the Mari live in a number of localities that are not part of the region (provinces: Nizhny Novgorod, Kostroma, Vyatka, Perm, Siberia; in the Bashkir Republic, the Mari make up a large group of up to 85,000 people). The Mari region, divided into 9 cantons, has a population of 481.781 people. (according to the last census). Of these, the Mari make up about 53%, the Russians, about 42%, and the Tatars, 4%. There are more women than men: there are 125 women for every 100 men. For a long time, the Mari are divided into upland and meadow. The very name indicates that the two branches were placed in different living conditions. Meadow, living along the lowest coast of the Volga, and surrounded by forests, and upland, living in a more elevated and more favorable climate, have different physical characteristics and speak two dialects that are little understood to each other. The climatic conditions were more favorable for the upland mari, therefore they are healthier than the meadow ones. Meadows, living in swampy, unhealthy forests, over time lost their strength, weakened, and now represent a weaker type. Before coming to these places, the Mari occupied the best lands along the Volga, but constrained by the movement of Russian colonization and the resulting movement of other nationalities, were compressed in a small space. The area of ​​the Mari region is 20.315.6 square meters. km., and almost 2/3 of this amount is occupied by forests, mainly coniferous. If earlier these forests covered the entire space, now the forest continues to play a big role in the life of the Mari. Their small villages are lost in this harsh sea of ​​forests. Once the forest was their only breadwinner, and hunting was the only occupation. For whole weeks the Mari left his dwelling, going to hunt. Then he gradually turned to agriculture. The influence of neighbors - Russians and others - played a big role in this. But even now, hunting is one of the main activities of the Mari, along with fishing and forestry. The fact is that agriculture does not provide the Mari with sufficient means to live. The first reason for this is the infertility of the soil, as a result of which many villages, whose sandy lands cannot bear bread, are almost exclusively engaged in forestry. And the mari also doesn't have much land 1) if we take into account its quality. Plots of land, which were reclaimed from the forest with great difficulty, need careful processing and care. Leading his farm in a primitive way (only recently there has been a change towards more improved cultivation), often with the same tools that his distant ancestors used — the Mari could not cultivate his plot well. The land cultivated in a primitive way was always barely able to feed the Mari peasants. Hunger, which became their usual companion due to crop failures, various economic and administrative constraints that existed up to the October Revolution, led the Mari to degeneration. And the Mari, oppressed for hundreds of years, could not find a way out of this situation. All this made the Mari distrustful and withdrawn, and they rarely went outside their settlements. Only handicrafts associated with the forest (woodworking) were developed. In this respect (especially the timber-chemical industry), the Mari region is in one of the first places. Tar smoking (extraction of tar, coal, turpentine), felling and rafting of forest materials, are the occupations of a significant part of the population, during the time free from field work. Of the crafts, the Mari are engaged in blacksmithing, carpentry, turning, etc. Although the Mari were baptized in the 18th century, among them, until recently, their former pagan rituals have survived, mixed with outwardly perceived Christian rites. Christianization is one of the main goals of the tsarist government in relation to national minorities. Before the revolution, all the enlightenment of the Mari (very small in size) was concentrated in the hands of the church, or organizations dependent on it. The ultimate goal of this enlightenment was Russification and Christianization, in order to thereby turn the once independent people into obedient victims of the colonial claims of the Russian bourgeoisie. As for the external life of the Mari in the pre-revolutionary era, it is also not complicated. The dwelling consists of a hut, a barn for storing bread and household junk, and round enclosures for livestock. Outwardly, the huts are similar to the Russians, white in color, and the view of small Mari villages — white against the background of a forest — is a beautiful sight. But inside these huts are rather unsightly. The furnishings are sparse. Around the walls are bunks for sleeping and often eating. Therefore, on the bunks of the sun Felt and other bedding are almost always lying around. The most expensive things are kept inside the bunks. Sometimes there are shops instead of bunks. The national dress of men consists of a white woolen caftan, sometimes trimmed with a blue cord — in the summer it is something like a canvas hoodie, with many covers or embroideries of red calico along the hem and ends of the sleeves. The shirts are similarly white and embroidered. Marie love white. In the same way, they are accustomed to the embroidery that fills their costumes. A felt hat, a belt belt, thick, black onuchi and bast shoes complete the men's clothing. The woman's costume is similar to the man's. Its peculiarity is the heavy headdress of a Mari woman: —the head is wrapped in a white canvas, which is wound on a support like a shovel, with prominent horns or corners — sometimes such a headdress is degraded with coins. Such a dress is obligatory for married — girls simply put on white kerchiefs, and laces are woven into their braids, concentrated in the hands of the church, or organizations that depend on it. The ultimate goal of this enlightenment was Russification and Christianization, in order to thereby turn the once independent people into obedient victims of the colonial claims of the Russian bourgeoisie. As for the external life of the Mari in the pre-revolutionary era, it is also not complicated. The dwelling consists of a hut, a barn for storing bread and household junk, and round enclosures for livestock. Outwardly, the huts are similar to the Russians, white in color, and the view of small Mari villages — white against the background of a forest — is a beautiful sight. But inside these huts are rather unsightly. The furnishings are sparse. Around the walls are bunks for sleeping and often eating. Therefore, felt and other bedding are almost always lying on the bunks. The most expensive things are kept inside the bunks. Sometimes there are shops instead of bunks. The national dress of men consists of a white woolen caftan, sometimes trimmed with a blue cord — in the summer it is something like a canvas hoodie, with many covers or embroideries of red calico along the hem and ends of the sleeves. The shirts are similarly white and embroidered. Marie love white. In the same way, they are accustomed to the embroidery that fills their costumes. A felt hat, a belt belt, thick, black onuchi and bast shoes complete the men's clothing. The woman's costume is similar to the man's. Its peculiarity is the heavy headdress of a Mari woman: —the head is wrapped in a white canvas, which is wound on a support like a shovel, with prominent horns or corners — sometimes such a headdress is degraded with coins. Such a dress is obligatory for married — girls simply put on white kerchiefs, and laces with beads and coins are woven into their braids, and they decorate their necks with coins and beads; they wear wire earrings in their ears, several pairs and very long. For hundreds of years, the Mari kept intact their everyday features and customs, their lands, could not fight the exploitation and continuous economic ruin that the autocracy and Russian capital carried to the Mari village along with Russification and Christianization. Maris were mercilessly exploited by both Russian capitalists and local kulaks. The class stratification of the Mari village, which had intensified since the beginning of the 20th century, pushed out of the Mari themselves, more prosperous, kulak elements, who began to share with the Russian bourgeoisie the fruits of the robbery of the poor Mari masses. The latter had no way of organizing and were powerless to fight them. Only from time to time did it come to attempts at indignation. Since the 16th century. (when the Mari rebelled against Russian rule several times, after the conquest of Kazan), the opinion was established that the Mari are the most proud and independent people among other nationalities of the Volga region. In a number of popular revolutionary movements (Razinovshchina, Pugachevshchina), they took an active part. But these speeches could not change anything in their position. Another hundred and fifty years passed in the same oppressive atmosphere and the Mari did not even have enough strength to fight it. After the February revolution, the still completely unformed class consciousness of the poor Mari forced him to partly support the petty-bourgeois ideas of his intelligentsia and kulaks. However, even during the February Revolution, the Mari took a more leftist position than the neighboring Volga peoples. Even after 1905, the Mari awakened a desire to improve their economic situation. Under the conditions of old Russia, this striving could not, of course, be realized to any significant extent, but after the February revolution the questions of nation-building, economic and cultural, have risen to their full extent. At the 1st congress of small peoples of the Volga region (May 1917) Mari L. Ya. Mendiarov was nominated as a rapporteur on national and cultural issues for the entire congress. In June 1927, the 1st All-Russian Congress of the Mari was convened in Birsk. The Mari military organization is being created in Kazan; Since August 1917, the 1st newspaper in the Mari language "Uzhara" (Esser) has been published. But all these undertakings, more verbal than actual, went along the line of supporting the bourgeois revolution and did not bring the Mari real emancipation. When in August 1917 at the 2nd All-Russian At the congress of the peoples of the Volga region, representatives of the Mari raised the issue of organizing national military units — the government forbade them to think about it. All this soon opened Mari's eyes to the true nature of the February revolution and forced her to refuse to support the Esser-minded part of the Mari intelligentsia. At the soldiers 'and peasants' meetings of the Mari, this dissatisfaction with the policy of the interim government and the desire to defend the slogans of the already brewing October Revolution was most vividly expressed. Only the October Revolution, which brought genuine liberation to Mari, resolved all these painful issues. The class consciousness of the poor peasants is quickly taking shape; they no longer follow the lead of the intelligentsia and the kulaks, who continue to be hostile to Soviet power in the form of the Central Mari Union, which essentially fought against the Soviets. Poor rural strata not only refuse to support the latter, but join the struggle against them, defending the slogans of October, under the leadership of a small group of revolutionary intelligentsia, who joined the Bolsheviks. Special Red Army units are created from Mari (in Kazan). Feverish work began to educate the Mari-Red Army men and, as far as possible, the peasants. The advanced elements of the Mari people took an active part in the struggle against the White Guards. After the liberation of Kazan from Kolchak, even more energetic work began. The question of awakening the class consciousness of the peasant Marie became a priority. Mari departments were created in Kazan and Moscow to guide all the work. Local committees were organized for the poor. At the end of 1918, the first Mari community was organized in Kazan. The agitation work done during these first years of the revolution is great. For * one year (1918-1919), a significant number of brochures in the Mari language were published. The newspaper "Yoshkir Keche" was published, persistently pursuing the class point of view. Finally, in February 1920 — at the congress of the Mari — a decree was passed on the creation of a Mari autonomous unit, which was soon implemented. The young region had to begin its existence in difficult conditions. The famine that spontaneously swept over the region, which reduced its population by 2.4%, forest fires, from which many villages burned down, and a number of other circumstances created a significant decline in the economy. Until 1923, the Mari people are straining their efforts to eliminate these consequences in the first place. It can be considered that by 1923 the most urgent tasks in this direction were completed and starting from this year a new construction is underway, which manifests itself not only in solving economic, but also cultural problems, which was quite a rarity among the Mari. If we turn to economic construction, then over the past few years, significant achievements should be noted. Numerical data indicate that already in 1925 the pre-war norms in the area under crops were reached (94.33% in relation to 1913, while in 1922 it was only 34.50%). At the same time, a qualitative improvement is noted — an increase in the area of ​​cultivated crops, industrial crops and clover crops, as well as an increase in demand for improved agricultural crops. tools, almost unknown to the Mari village before the revolution. The number of livestock in 1925 also reached the average pre-war level. Cooperation with.-kh. population is the way to improve the economy. In the Mari region, on 1/1 of 1926!. 20% of farms were cooperative. Maroblast, which has large reserves of forests in the structure of its economy, aspires to use them. It should be considered a very positive fact that the restoration, albeit small, but in the situation of a significant region, of the timber and wood-chemical industries, in the pre-war volume. And now the Mari themselves can work in their factories, build their industry. The second, very positive, fact in this area is the provision of communication routes that are so necessary for the export of forest products. The construction of the Zeleny Dol-Krasnokokshaisk railway line (the main center of the Mar-region), connecting the region with sales markets, meets the urgent tasks of economic construction. Handicrafts are also recovering; Mari furniture and other wood products are entering the market in increasing numbers. Finally, beekeeping, which represented and makes up a significant part of the Mari national economy, has not only survived its recovery period, but is also improving in quality. It is interesting to note that if before the revolution there was a noticeable increase in relation to 1913, while in 1922 it was only 34.50%). At the same time, a qualitative improvement is noted — an increase in the area of ​​cultivated crops, industrial crops and clover crops, as well as an increase in demand for improved agricultural crops. tools, almost unknown to the Mari village before the revolution. The number of livestock in 1925 also reached the average pre-war level. Cooperation with.-kh. population is the way to improve the economy. In maris What region for 1/1 of 1926!. 20% of the farms were cooperated. It should be considered a very positive fact that the restoration, albeit small, but in the situation of a significant region, of the timber and wood-chemical industries, in the pre-war volume. And now the Mari themselves can work in their factories, build their industry. The second, very positive, fact in this area is the provision of communication routes that are so necessary for the export of forest products. The construction of the Zeleny Dol-Krasnokokshaisk railway line (the main center of the Mar-region), connecting the region with sales markets, meets the urgent tasks of economic construction. Handicrafts are also recovering; Mari furniture and other wood products are entering the market in increasing numbers. Finally, beekeeping, which represented and makes up a significant part of the Mari national economy, has not only survived its recovery period, but is also improving in quality. It is interesting to note that if before the revolution there was a noticeable increase in large business enterprises in beekeeping, now the size of individual apiaries has decreased, but their total number is increasing. economic construction, in turn, creates the basis for social and cultural construction. In this respect, things were catastrophic before the revolution. Diseases, raging in spontaneous proportions, could not be eliminated, at least partially, in the absence of a desire to improve the life of the Mari on the part of the tsarist government, with a complete almost absence of hospitals and education. They were afraid to look into the Mari village, imagining the Mari as “wild foreigners”. It is therefore important to note the continuous growth in recent years of the health authorities and the vigorous fight against mass diseases (trachoma, malaria, etc.), which has already yielded significant results. In the field of education, significant progress has also been achieved. There are a number of educational institutions of a special nature — pedagogical, agricultural, vocational, educational and demonstration schools, 7-year, 9-year, etc. and 390 grade I schools (1/1-26). To characterize the significance of educational work mari — indicative of 0/0 of them, studying in schools of the first stage. As it grew, it approached the% of the Mari population in the region (by 1 / XN — 26 in schools of the 1st grade — 12.888 Mari, in 7-year-olds — 2135, etc.). Mari constitute the majority in 3 party schools in the region. Thus, if earlier there was no way out for Mari from the ignorance that surrounded them, now the situation has completely changed- (it has changed. The younger generation is quickly getting rid of this ignorance, prejudices, learning to build their lives in a completely different way through the Komsomol, school and political educational institutions.If before the revolution all the meager literature in * the Mari language consisted, for the most part, in translations of various kinds of "sacred" scriptures, and countless "lives of the saints", now not only the amount of literature is incomparable with the previous one, but also in its own way content, it touches on the issues that are most understandable, interesting and necessary for the Mari peasant, student and other groups of the population. ” course towards an alliance with the poor-middle peasant groups, with the active support of which it can be Work on the economic and cultural liberation of the Mari has been completed. Their main task - the awakening of the class consciousness of the poor peasant elements of the Mari village, which, as we have seen, always stood as the main one - is carried out with sufficient clarity and its results are undoubtedly significant. With the inevitably sharpened class differentiation of the Mari village in recent years, the poor strata continue, under the leadership of the party, to play a predominant role in economic and cultural development. The Mari Komsomol, in addition to all this, has big tasks in the fight against everyday abnormalities by involving into its ranks for a certain creative and useful work, the very Mari youth, who previously spent most of their free time in aimless going to gatherings, etc. which, moreover, are often carriers of infection. The Komsomol has done a lot in this respect, raising its importance in the eyes of the Mari peasant and attracting more and more young people into its ranks, However, even such significant work done in each separate branch of the Mari economy and culture has not yet made the position of the latter completely happy. It will take many more years to achieve this. The former Congress of Soviets of the Wasp Region in March 1926 he was especially attentive to the issues of economic and cultural development of the Mari. Having noted the above achievements, he still had to admit the situation is still quite difficult, having come to the following conclusions: 1) The economy of the Mari is natural, has almost no industrial crops and is characterized by weak marketability. 2) The economy of the Mari is largely conducted in a primitive manner “like fathers and grandfathers led.” 3) Primitiveness in the economy associated with a variety of everyday habits and superstitions gives insignificant economic results, which is why the economy of the Mari peasant lags behind the economy of his neighbors, Russians and Tatars.4 ) Satisfaction of the cultural and social needs of the Mari depends on its economy. 5) Teaching children, their literacy, is recognized as necessary only for the knowledge of counting, money. Only in the presence of a surplus of working hands in the family is the luxury of giving education permissible, and then only with the aim of receiving material support from him for the household at the end of the course, when he will be a “clerk, teacher or priest.” 6) Women's education is almost not recognized. As a result, out of a hundred literate people in the oblast, there are Mari, men — 29.6%, women — 7%; Russian men - 51.2%, and women - 26%. The plight of the Mari in terms of health was also noted, especially children under 15 years of age, etc. It seems to us that these conclusions are in some respects much more acute, than necessary, and the actual situation is somewhat better. If we compare it with the pre-revolutionary one, then this improvement will be very significant — it has already been mentioned. The same congress outlined a number of further measures to raise the economic and socio-cultural condition of the Mari people, created a special section to study the issues of the Mari economy and culture. In particular, in the field of agriculture, a task has been set for the transition to the 10th anniversary of the region (1931) of half of all farms in the multifield. The task is also to create a more significant timber industry in the region.