1. General outline of the region and people
Votskaya Autonomous Region was formed from Glazovsky, Malmyzhsky, Sarapulsky and Yelabuzhsky districts of Vyatka province in 1921. According to the 1927 census, the population of the Votsk region is 755.669 people, on the territory of 20.430 sq. versts According to information from 1924, the population by nationality was distributed as follows: Votyaks — 481.399 people, 65 ° / 0; Russians - 244.402 people, 33%; Tatars — 12,000 people, 1.7%, and others — 2,813 people, 0.3% (total 740,614 people) The real name of the Ud-Murty Votyaks (that is, a person from the people or tribe of Ud. Cheremisy Zovug Votyaks — odo; the Russians used to call them — Otyaks, then it turned into “Votyaks.”) Votyaks from all the peoples of the Finnish tribe were pushed further north by the Russian colonization. The harsh nature of the region, which did not provide enough means for food, had an impact on their appearance. Alternately exploited by the Tatars and Russians, they rapidly dwindled in number and further and further closed themselves into their inhospitable, force-imposed region. They did not give up their places without a struggle, which was especially fierce in the 16th century, after the conquest of Kazan. And subsequently, the Votyaks, driven out of themselves both by the general policy of the tsarist government and by local abuses and oppression, rebelled several times. They especially 'hated the priests, who pursued a policy of Russification and Christianization, accompanied by a number of violence. It was with them that they dealt with first of all during the Pugachevism, and then asked Pugachev for permission to remain in paganism. At the beginning of the 19th century, unrest occurred again among the Votyaks, this time caused by their forcible attachment to work in factories. But they had no organizational center, no leaders; therefore, up to the beginning of the 20th century, their entire national movement has the character of spontaneous outbreaks. By the time of 1905, the Votyaks already had their own intelligentsia, and the latter, especially the people's teachers, sensitively listened to the people's demands, formalized them and took an active part in the revolutionary movements. One of such movements — the Votyak movement, known under the name of the Novo-Multan case — constitutes a glorious page in the history of the Votyak people. It was attended by professional revolutionaries — Comrade Iosifov (Nogovitsyn) and MP Prokopiev (an old Bolshevik). A number of folk teachers were the leaders of the movement. The tsarist government, with the hands of the gendarmerie, brutally dealt with the insurgents: the leaders of the movement were exiled to distant outskirts, comrade Iosifov (Nogovitsyn), to exile in Siberia. To what extent this case stood out from others like him and became widely known, it is clear from the fact that Nikolai I himself, at the reception of the chairmen of the zemstvo councils, asked the chairman of the Vyatka council: “What kind of Novo-Multan territory is this?” Multan uprising. There was also the Old Multan case (90 years of the XIX century), when the tsarist government, not content with the fact that it had already instilled in the society the idea of ​​the Votyaks as savages, still wanted to present them as almost cannibals, bringing human sacrifices ; but, in spite of all the tricks, this accusation could not be proved. After the February Revolution, at first, bourgeois-compromising elements became predominant. At the congress of small peoples of the Volga region, the Votyak representatives took a right-wing position in relation to other congress groups. However, soon the Votyak poor and the revolutionary intelligentsia unite around the slogans of the October Revolution. Communist cells are created, congresses are convened, etc. The Votyak poor are organized to fight the counter-revolution in special detachments. The October Revolution brought emancipation to the Votiaks, but has not yet brought an end to all their troubles. The region suffered greatly during the offensive of Kolchak, as well as during the uprising of petty-bourgeois and kulak elements, led by the city of Izhevsk, against the Soviet regime. In some areas, up to 60% of Votyak villages were burned during the struggle. All this ended in famine, which led to a mass of deaths, a reduction in crops and a pestilence of livestock. Only after that was it possible to begin peaceful construction. With the national subjem that embraces the Votyaks, especially the Votyak intelligentsia, work is progressing rapidly. We will say more about its results, now let us get acquainted with the life and occupations of the Votyaks. The Votyaks are exclusively peasants, although in the Vot-region there is one largest plant — Izhevsk, and two more for & ode; however, there are almost no Votiaks among them. The Votyaks did not like to work in factories, since in the old days there was a mandatory assignment of them to factories for work, which was one of the reasons for their indignation. Only after the October Revolution it became possible for the Votyak to be a worker on a par with the Russians and to take an active part in the structure of production. Now, of course, there are still a few workers-votyaks, but before there were none at all. The votyaks are dirty, dark and damp. Instead of benches, bunks are arranged around the walls in the hut, on which they sleep side by side. They also pay little attention to their clothes, which are poor and unkempt. Such untidiness creates fertile ground for the spread of various diseases. Men dress almost the same as Russians; for women, the outfit is more beautiful and original: a sundress along the hem and sleeves is trimmed with a red ribbon, the apron is also embroidered all over with multi-colored patterns. Around the neck is a monisto of silver coins, which usually constitutes the heirloom value of the Votyaks and is carefully preserved. It is sold only when absolutely necessary (hunger, etc.). On their heads, the Votyachki wear a headdress called "aishon", which resembles a Russian kokoshnik, only it is taller than it and is hung with silver coins and silk ribbons. However, this is now falling out of use, and the Votyaks borrow their dress from the Russians. The main occupation of the Votyaks is agriculture. Once they were exclusively engaged in hunting, which now plays a significant role. Although the Votyak has more land than its neighbors, Russians and Tatars, this land is not very fertile, and the economy is conducted in the most primitive way. Three-field and partly striped, the use of sabans, wooden harrows and other primitive tools does not provide an opportunity to work the land well. Votyak is not yet accustomed to innovations, he must look out, think, wait, and therefore agricultural implements, more modern, do not penetrate much into the Votyak village, although a great shift has taken place in this direction recently. In the years after the famine, the main focus was on rebuilding agriculture. It can be considered that this recovery period was completed in 1925. The sown area reached 98.5%, in relation to 1916 (658,200 dessiatines) and the gross harvest was 95%. For some crops, the harvest exceeded the average pre-war yield, reaching 44 poods per tithe for rye (instead of 43 pre-war), 47 poods for oats (instead of 46 pre-war) and 58 poods of barley (instead of 52 pre-war). The number of draft animals is also approaching the pre-war level. Growing little by little and agricultural. inventory. These are the first steps towards further improvement of the economy. The distribution of land and draft animals is not very variegated, which shows that the class stratification is not very strong in the Votyak village. It should be noted that the Votyak was thrifty, despite the low harvests; - it was said earlier that he was only then he feels calm when he has a supply of bread for 2 years. Votyak's support activities are beekeeping and hunting. Beekeeping is quite well developed, and Votyak, with his persistence and skill, is a born beekeeper. He treats this very carefully and, despite the fact that he uses primitive: hives, he knows how to remove good harvests of honey. As for hunting, here too he uses the funds he inherited from his fathers. Weapons are used little. But no one better than a Votyak can make a trap, a snare for an animal or a bird. Having preserved these old tools, he does not try to replace them with new, more convenient ones. We have already said that the Votyaks work little in factories, where they were forcibly driven by the tsarist government. In exactly the same way, they are not engaged in side trades. Farmwork and carriage are their occupation at a time when they are free from field work. Handicrafts are underdeveloped. Votyaki makes only baskets, beetroots and bast shoes, mostly for their own consumption or for a small area. It must be said, however. that Votyak is said to be a jack of all trades. Maybe this is due to the fact that he does not always have the opportunity to buy this or that thing. He is often himself a blacksmith and carpenter, joiner and tailor. Spoons, cups, tables, skis — he does it all himself. He himself makes himself a hat of sheep's wool, makes cloth from which he sews a zipun, makes harness for a horse from bast shoes, weaves bast shoes, makes a plow and a harrow. In this respect, there is a division of labor between a man and a woman, who in the votyak family is not only a housewife, but also performs the role of a doctor and a number of other duties. At present, the Votyaks have become more attentive to gardening. The reason for this is the famine in 1921/22. The vegetable garden lies entirely in the care of the woman. Backward methods of cultivating the land, moreover inconvenient and requiring a lot of care, create a strong, great need for working hands. Each piece of land requires careful and long work. Therefore, not only a woman, but also children, at an early age, are involved in field and household work. The family values ​​every worker: they try to keep the girl longer until she gets married. In turn, the groom's family wants, by marrying a young boy of 16-17 years old, to get an already fully developed female worker, 25 years old. This explains the inequality of marriageable ages. Votyaks are not averse to giving their children an education, but the need for working hands makes them take their children from school early, and often do not teach at all for fear that the child will not learn to work. After giving the child 7-9 years old to study, the Votyak takes him at the age of 10-11 years, saying that “a worker is needed” (“I am horrified by the kule”). Therefore, among the Votiaks there was the highest percentage of illiterate women — up to 9O%. In here At schools in the 1st group there are often up to 100 people, in the latter there are no more than 5-6 people. Votyak's food is monotonous and already scarce. Difficult living conditions give special value to food in general, and especially to bread. Scattering bread or leaving crumbs on the table is not good, as this can anger the spirit and patron of food. Therefore, the crumbs are taken to the field and scattered there. (Belief in the great role of bread makes the Votyaks consider it some kind of miraculous object. When going on a long journey, the Votyak always takes “bread with him, and only feeling a piece of it in his bosom, he is calm, because bread, this priceless substance, from which the life of every living creature depends on, he: will be able to appease any spirit. Faith in these spirits and gods survived in the Votyaks, despite the fact that about 200 years ago, they were forced to convert to Christianity. The usual drinks of Votyak are kvass and homemade beer The most common alcoholic drink is "little bit" made from malt, rye and oat flour. This is an intoxicating and strong drink that has a harmful effect on the body. But the Votyaks are so used to it that they consider it the best drink in the world and prefer any other. In order to expel the "kumyshka" from the VOTYATSKY village, a struggle with educational measures is needed. Exactly the same struggle is needed against superstition and witchcraft, which still live in the Votyatsky village vnyah. When someone falls ill, the Votyaks do not change the sick linen, because, according to their beliefs, the spirit of the illness can get angry from changing and washing the linen, and then the sick man will get worse. Thus, the patient is left to himself and the "spirit of the disease." How Votyaks imagine diseases can be inferred from the following interesting story, which is very characteristic of the entire Votyak life, the keepers of which are women: “The Votyak went into the forest for firewood and, having chopped wood, sat down to rest. Suddenly he hears: steps are approaching him, and several people are consulting about something. Votyak got up and saw: two hefty people are going somewhere past him. Votyak quickly hid behind a tree and began to listen to what they were saying. One says: "I am going to such and such a village and I will shiver such and such a person," and at the same time calls the name of the same Votyak who hid under a tree and overheard them. “When he starts to eat soup, he never says: Osto Kozma! (God bless!). Together with the soup, I enter it and do my job. ”“ Hey, ”thought the votyak,“ because these are fevers, and one of them intends to visit me. No, you are naughty, I will teach you a lesson this time, fever, and I will teach you a lesson so that you will never look at me again. " Having said this, the Votyak went home. He came, and the stew, as if on purpose, was already on the table. Votyak, before sitting down at the table, took his leather bag, then sat down at the table and, without saying anything, poured three spoons of soup into it. Then he tied the bag tightly and hung it on the wall, and sat down at the table and said: “Osto Kozma and began to eat. After a while, the pouch began to shake, like a person during a chill. And he was shaking because he was in a fever. Thinking of getting into the mouth of a man with the soup, which the Votyak poured into the bag, she got into this last one, but when she got there, she couldn't get out, because the bag was tightly tied. Votyak, as soon as the bag began to shake, threw it into a hot oven to fry the fever. Then he took it out and hung it on the wall again and did it for a week. Finally, the fever could not stand it and begged the Votyak: "Let me go, please!", And the Votyak says: "I will let go if you never bother me again." The fever says: "No, I won't, just let it go." Votyak untied his bag. There was a strong cracking sound, similar to the one we hear when we remove the cork from a beer bottle — the fever flew out of the bag. The next day the Votyak went to his former place to get some wood and again hears: steps and voices approaching him. Votyak got up and saw: “They are not going out of the forest, as before, but into the forest, two people. “These are the very fevers,” he said to himself, “which I recently heard here, under a tree. But why is one of them so thick and plump, and the other thin and dry as a stick? Before, they seemed to be the same in their fullness. ”-“ Well, I was amused, ”says a thick fever, a thin one:“ for a whole week I ruffled him, and he shook like an aspen leaf. I sucked all the fat out of it, and that's why I myself became plump. ”“ And I almost died, ”the thin fever said plaintively:“ the damned man brought a leather bag to his mouth and began to eat. I was about to sit down on a spoon and, along with the soup, went to my mouth, but the man knocked over his spoon and poured the whole soup into the bag; I fell in for the stew, and the man, meanwhile, tied a bag and hung it on the wall. I, as usual, caused, there was a strong chill, but the person, noticing that the bag was shaking, threw it, and, of course, me with it, into the hot oven. Then he took it out, hung it on the wall again, then threw it into the oven again, took it out of the oven again, hung it on the wall. and thus tortured me for a whole week. Finally, I could not bear such torture and shouted: "Man, let me go, please!" And he says: "Give me your word that you will never bother me again." I gave, then he let go. ”Priests, sorcerers and professional sorcerers,“ abyz ”, played the main role in the village of Votyats before the revolution. "Abyz" was revered much more than a doctor, since he, unlike the latter, knew the Votyak language and all the customs of the Votyak village. Only recently, thanks to a number of shifts, as a result of the revolution, "abyz" is gradually losing its position, and the population is increasingly turning not to him, but to doctors. Women also played an important role in this regard, which we will discuss later, and, in particular, the Votyak youth, which is the most revolutionary stratum in the countryside. The Votyaks still retain traces of family life, and only recently has its rapid decay been taking place. This was manifested in the communal structure, in the skills for collectivism. The village assembly, "ke-nesh", had supreme power in the village, right up to the disposal of the life of any fellow villager. All matters were decided by this meeting and various offenses were tried. Theft was severely punished by the Votyaks. And it almost never happened. Until now, old people remember the time when the barns were not locked and did not know the use of locks. Likewise, these collective skills persisted in relationships. Votyak is a good family man, and usually the family lives together. He also tries to live peacefully and well with his neighbors. “You cannot live without neighbors, without community,” says the Votyak proverb. With them, he, like in the family, considers it necessary to consult on various occasions. That is why Votyaks love to live in large families; if the family grows and it becomes crowded in one hut, then they build another, and although they live in two huts, the property remains common. It used to be common that entire villages were united into a community for cultivating the land, hunting, etc. They take part in various kinds of work together and evenly divide the extracted. But in recent years, before the revolution, such cases became more rare, and with the emergence of such associations, the desire of the richer, stronger elements to exploit the weak was revealed: - the poor. The unfolding class struggle in the Votyak village destroyed almost all the remnants of the old way of life. The Enlightenment did not develop before the revolution, and due to ignorance, the poor and unsanitary conditions, infectious diseases, especially venereal diseases, became widespread. Quite a large, primitive, licentiousness, gatherings and other customs also contributed to this. Given the deep intrusion of these customs and prejudices into the life of the Votyaks, the fight against them is extremely difficult. It could begin only after the elimination of all the calamities that befell the Votsk region at the beginning of the revolution: Kolchak, civil war and famine. At first, the main attention of the Soviet government was focused on eliminating the consequences of these disasters, and only now, when the economy of the Votyak village is rapidly moving along the path of its restoration, can more attention be paid to cultural work. Great perseverance is needed in order to conduct work in a planned manner, great skill is needed to approach the Votyak, who is accustomed to everything. We have already said that in this respect the youth organizations are of great importance, on whose shoulders all the work of educating the Votyak village falls. The very fact of attracting these young people to Komsomol organizations, cultural enlightenment circles and others, separating them from the traditional pastime at get-togethers that take evenings and nights from autumn to spring is an extremely significant achievement. But these young people were able not only to organize themselves, but they managed to win recognition from the Votyak peasantry, who at first had a very negative attitude to such undertakings. The idea of ​​Komsomol cells as a necessary and useful school for young people is penetrating deeper and deeper into the minds of the Votyaks. Now it is not uncommon to hear how happy Votyach-mothers are when their son or daughter gets into the Komsomol. It is said that one vot, who three years ago was fanatical against the communists, later prayed and thanked God for helping her daughter get into the Komsomol. Leading people appear in the village, and already to them, and not to sorcerers, the peasants go for advice. The unfolding class struggle finds the poor peasants of the Votyak village more often than not already organized, and they are victorious. An important role in this is played by the Red Army, bringing to their native villages a lot of new things that the Votyaks have been expecting for so long. School building 'is developing. Already in 1923, there were 329 I stage schools, 23 II stage schools, 72 orphanages and 19 kindergartens in the region. By 1926, the number of grade I schools had already increased to 452. Since the region has few funds for a wide organization of work, the center is constantly providing additional funds. In the Votsk region. two newspapers are published in the Votyak language. During the years of the revolution, about 100 books were published and brochures in the Votyak language, providing the Votyak peasant with much-needed information on agriculture, social issues, health protection, etc. Books in the Votyak language were published before the revolution, but these were, in the overwhelming majority, different lives of sowing, etc. It can be considered that the preliminary work on the education of the Votyak village is already coming to an end, and in the near future it will proceed at an even deeper and broader pace. Possessing natural resources (coal, iron and copper ores, mineral springs and mud, forests, game, etc.) and inhabited by stubborn grain growers who love their work, the Votskaya region has every reason for the further and rapid development of its economy. This, in turn, will make it possible to finally get rid of all those negative traits that we talked about. In this respect, the presence of such large factories as Izhevsk and others in Votobrazne is very important. The presence of an organized proletariat among the entirely peasant population has a beneficial effect on changing the old way of life of the peasantry and other aspects of its life.