1. Kalmyk people before and after the revolution
"Kalmyk" or in Tatar, "khalmik" - occurs rt of the Turkic verb "Kalmak" - - to remain '. This is the name of the remnants of the people who, around 1618, in search of free lands for nomads (and perhaps for other reasons that are still unknown to us) in the amount of up to 50 thousand wagons, stood out from the powerful Oirat-Mongolian union, which occupied Dzungaria and Mongolia, and headed west through Siberia and the Urals. Only in 1632 he reached the Volga and occupied the region from the Caspian Sea on both banks of this river to the town of Tsaritsyn. Although the territory occupied by the Kalmyks already belonged to Vagan Khan (the White Tsar), who had a well-equipped fortress of Astrakhan, the Kalmyks, having subjugated the few Tatar peoples who were here, became the actual masters of this territory. From the moment the Kalmyks appeared on the Volga, the Russian pavitelstvo tried to use them for their predatory plans. So, it draws them into the war with the Crimean Khan ', organizes raids on the Kumyks, Bukharians, Kara-Kalpaks, Kirghiz, sends them to fight with Persia (1722) and Dagestan. During this period, the Kalmyks still retain, though not visible, independence. only in internal self-government, but also in foreign policy. Russia needs them as a living force that can be used for conquering goals, which is why their complete conquest was considered unnecessary. But endless military campaigns, strife within the khan's house, gradually undermine the Kalmyk people and contribute to their impoverishment. Following the model of the Russian tsar, the Kalmyk khan became a tsar, and the Kalmyk aristocracy, noyons, zaisangs, became his courtiers from military leaders, exploiting the common people. In the course of time, Russian policy completely weakens the khan's power, decomposes the administrative apparatus and abruptly begins a struggle against the national manifestations of the Kalmyks, first of all, implanting Orthodoxy among them. peculiarities, led to the fact that the Kalmyk people began to hate Russia. In 1771, a rumor spread across the steppe that the tsar had decided to convert all Kalmyks to Orthodoxy, that the tsar ordered the sons of the sovereign princes to be taken as amanats (hostages), and the "vile Kalmyks" up to ten thousand as soldiers. Soon there was a rumor that "young children are required — for what and where — it is not known." Most of these rumors were spread by the princes themselves, who were also severely oppressed by the Russian authorities and who decided to leave the Russians for China. Secret preparations for escape had been going on for a long time. The Dala Lama (religious leader, lives in Tibet) blessed the campaign and set the date of 1770-71, since “that time for the escape may be happy.” On January 4, 1771, the governor of Ubushi, put by Russia instead of the khan, before the army about 'announced his decision to leave Russia and on January 5 the Kalmyk people almost ran from the Volga to the East, to Siberia. 30,909 wagons went with the governor. Only 11.198 remained in place, mainly because they were located in the upland side, in the uluses, the owners-princes of which were at enmity with the governor, and in addition, because the ice drift that began on the Volga cut off some of them from the main forces. Only after crossing the river. The Urals, Kalmyks learned that they were taken to distant China. The Volga Kalmyks traveled a hard and exhausting path. Subject to endless attacks of the Kirghiz, Kaisaks, Tatars, exhausted from all hardships and diseases, only a third of them came to China. The Chinese government 'turned out to be no better than the Russian one. It immediately took a number of measures to weaken the cohesion of the Kalmyks, for which it split the uluses into parts. They were allowed to roam only independently, that is, who had their flocks. The poor were settled near the cities and, with the help of special instructors, began to teach arable farming. After a series of uprisings, suppressed with great cruelty, the Kalmyks settled in China, mixing with various Mongol tribes and losing all solidarity. ”With the departure of most of the Kalmyk people from Russia, the political life of the Kalmyks who remained on the Volga ended. By decree; Catherine II, the khan's power was destroyed forever. The landlords were placed in an independent position from one another and each was given an ulus in hereditary possession, but under Russian government supervision. The Pugachev movement, which broke out just at that time (1772), found fertile ground in the Kalmyk steppe. Most of the Kalmyks responded to Pugachev's call (Sept. 17, 1773) and openly joined him. In the form of repression, the Russian government! closed the national court by transferring cases to the county courts; soon at the head of the Kalmyk people, the tsarist government appointed "the chief bailiff of the Kalmyk people." In 1825 serfdom was established in the Kalmyk steppe. The people became poor and fell into decay. Since 1834, guardianship was established over the Kalmyk people, which existed until the February Revolution of 1917, and heavy taxes were imposed; (Albanian,It goes without saying that, given their political and economic backwardness, the Kalmyks were completely unprepared for the first Russian revolution of 1904. Totally illiterate, they were severely oppressed by the landowners noyons and za-sangs, who were in alliance with Russian officials ... The tsarist government systematically pursued a colonialist policy in the steppe. Russian settlers covered the Kalmyk steppe in a tight circle, constantly expanding their possessions at the expense of the steppe. However, revolutionary slogans and rumors about the events of 1905 in the neighboring provinces reached the steppe. A real agrarian revolution broke out among the Kalmyks, directed against the aggressive tendencies of the Russians. The Kalmyk princes quickly took the movement into their own hands and, by speculating on it, achieved talent for the Kalmyk people, that is, by themselves, some ghosts, including the right to elect to the newly formed State Duma. As expected, they were involved in building a new life. only the large landowners, who sent Prince Tundutov the owner of the Malo-Derbetovsky ulus and Tyumen, the owner of the Khosheutovsky ulus, to the Duma. These are the results of the 1905 revolution, the tsarist autocracy in its policy relied exclusively on the Kalmyk clan nobility. All the best lands were assigned to landlords and princes. In addition to the landlord princes, the clergy, who also owned vast lands, numerous herds and large capitals, occupied a special position. The February revolution of 1917 was met by the Kalmyk people, just like 1905, unprepared. The steppe was indifferent to the activity of its aristocracy. On March 25, 1917, the guardianship gathered a congress of "representatives" of the people in Astrakhan to organize the administration. It is not hard to guess that this congress consisted of noyons, za-sangs, Russian officials, a small Kalmyk intelligentsia and clergy. The Congress decided to serve with faith and truth to Russia and refused to support the Astrakhan proletariat. The congress established the Central Committee for the Management of the Kalmyk People, as well as ulus and aimakam committees. The congress worked out many resolutions on the reorganization of the court, school affairs, etc., forgetting about the most important thing — the land reform, which the landless Kalmyk people so needed. This painful issue was passed over in silence by the new executive committees put forward by the February Revolution. And so the people, realizing that they had nothing to expect from the masters, decided to fight for their rights. Agrarian riots began in the border zone, then the Kalmyks, who were not herders, demanded that they be equal in land use rights. The authorities persisted, and an uprising arose in the steppe (summer 1917). Punitive expeditions started working, arrests and deportations began. The second congress of the Kalmyk people, which, like the first, was without true representatives of the people, emphasized the touching connection of the landlord princes with the clergy. He issued a decree on the introduction of Buddhist teaching in Kalmyk schools, approved the decision of the spiritual council to increase the number of khuruls (monasteries) and the staff of the clergy, motivating this by the fact that Buddhist teachings help a common Kalmyk learn life. This congress did not say a word about land reform either. While the landowners and clergy were energetically implementing the decisions of their congress, the Kalmyk people remained an avid spectator. When the first news of the October Revolution arrived in the steppe, the Central Committee openly went over to the hostile camp and began work on the defense of the steppe. from the Bolsheviks. Even on the eve of October, the princes and landowners secured the admission of Kalmyks to the Astrakhan Cossacks, and now they preached the universal armament of the newly minted Cossacks. The organized counter-revolutionary government began to form Cossack regiments. At that time, in Astrakhan, power was already in the hands of the workers, and on January 12, 1918, counter-revolutionary troops approached the city fortress, together with the first Kalmyk units under the command of their ataman, Prince Tundutov. On January 24, the Astrakhan proletariat dealt a decisive blow to the enemy and the Kalmyks fled across the steppe. Under the formidable pressure of the Astrakhan people, the Kalmyk government disgracefully fled to the Don. On February 3, 1918, at a meeting of Kalmyks of the Kalmyk Bazaar, a resolution was passed recognizing the power of the SNK and renouncing the Cossacks. 'rides, who have elected their executive committee. But he did not have to expand the work. The impending civil war also seized the Kalmyk steppe, which split into pieces. This time, the Kalmyk cavalry hundreds, created in the south of the steppe, came to the aid of the Astrakhan proletariat, which had re-gathered its forces. On the other hand, relying on Tsaritsyn, occupied by the White Guards, noyons and rayeaigi and Noveli returned to the northern part of the steppe, corrupting work among the people, winning over to their side many newly assembled Red Kalmyk units. The new Congress of Soviets, convened on December 19, 1918, irrevocably takes the side of the revolutionary proletariat a, he declares a broad mobilization of the Kalmyks, who formed two regiments. In the midst of the struggle, the Executive Committee sent to Moscow for support. On July 22, 1919, Comrade Lenin addresses the first, which has become a historical appeal to the Kalmyk people. Here are its characteristic passages: “Brothers Kalmyks! The entire past of your people is a continuous chain of suffering. Your people, thanks to their economic and political backwardness, have always been an object of exploitation by their stronger neighbors. The autocratic tsarist government, which by bloody seizure extended its power to many foreign tribes, imposed a chain of slavery on the freedom-loving Kalmyk people. Having taken possession, the autocracy all the time treated you like slaves. The lands that are in your use were cut. You were forbidden to study, to print books in your native language. You were deliberately kept in, darkness in order to make it easier to oppress you. Many of you were taken into military service in order to take advantage of your darkness to use you as an instrument of oppression of others, like you, oppressed peoples ... “Standing for the protection of the interests of the working masses of all peoples, the Workers-Cross; yatskse The Soviet government is hereby declaring to you: “Brothers of the Kalmyks! that the fate of your people lies in your own hands. Therefore, the Council of People's Commissars decided to assist the working Kalmyk people in the convocation of the All-Kalmyk Labor Congress ... "Two days later, on July 24, 1919, the government signed by Comrade Lenin publishes the following historical document -" Announcement to the Kalmyk People about its new structure. land life ". Here is the first and main point of this announcement: “The Kalmyk working people declare that the lands of the Kalmyk steppe are forever free from the oppression of the rich and constitute the property of the working Kalmyk people. Detailed rules for the use of land will be worked out by the population of the Kalmyk steppe and its future government, in relation to the conditions of life and economy "... This announcement coincided with the transition of the Red Army to the offensive. Frightened by the landowners' rumors about the atrocities of the Reds, many Kalmyks rushed to flee together with their landowners from the liberated uluses, abandoning their farm and cattle. And so in the steppe, special detachments were moved to clarify the real situation to the population. In the liberated uluses, the work of creating councils quickly began to boil, and a close relationship with the Kalmyks of Don and Terek was soon established. However, the situation inside the region was difficult. The Kalmyks, exhausted by the war and hunger, did not want to fight anymore, the steppe was filled with deserters. On July 2, 1920, the first general Kalmyk congress convened, which issued a "declaration of the rights of the Kalmyk people." On November 2, 1920, the Central Executive Committee announced a decree on the autonomy of the Kalmyks by creating an autonomous region of the Kalmyk people. This decree completed the historical era of the Kalmyk people with a hundred-year stubborn struggle for its existence. From that moment on, the true economic, cultural and political construction of the Kalmo region began.

2. Kalmyk Autonomous Region and the way of life of the population
The Kalmyk Autonomous Region is one of the few regions of our Union where the population has not yet left the forms of cattle-breeding and nomadic economy. The well-being of the region depends almost exclusively on the state of livestock raising; agriculture here plays only a secondary role and has an auxiliary value. The Kalmyk region with a population of 142 thousand souls occupies the entire space of the right and upland banks of the river. Volga. Of the total population of the oblast, 75.6% are Kalmyks, 21.1% of Russians, 3.3% of Germans, Tatars and others. Its surface area is 77.126 sq. km. Its territory stretches for 500 km from east to west in a straight line. and from north to south for 400 km. The population density is 2.4 people. per G sq. kilometer. With respect to the surface, the region can be divided into two sharply different parts - the western elevated and the eastern, low-lying steppe, dropping in some places below sea level. From the north, the region borders on the Stalingrad province, from the east - with the Astrakhan, from the south - the Terek and Stavropol regions and from the west, with the Salsk district, the Don region. After numerous disputes with neighbors, the borders were established in accordance with the ethnic composition of the population. The region is divided into 9 uluses, equivalent to counties'; uluses are divided into aimaks with the right of the volost. The settlement is called. hoton. The administrative division of the region was made mainly according to living conditions (and tribal relationships were taken into account). The centers of large uluses are now fully established, but there are such uluses as Erketnevsky and Bogatsokhurovsky, which do not have their own large settlement, and ulus institutions are located in the adjacent villages of the Astrakhan province. The regional center is located in, Astrakhan, but the issue of transferring it to the Manychsky ulus, to the Elista headquarters, where regional institutions have already begun to move, has already been resolved. Fast. All-Russian Central Executive Committee of May 21, 1928 Kalm-region "became part of the Lower Volga region. The region's peculiarities are extreme poverty of nature, roadless steppe. There is not a single cultural route on the territory of the region: the nearest railway the station is located 120 versts from the western border of the region; in the eastern part, along the border of two uluses, the Volga runs along an insignificant extent, and beyond it, at 30-40 versts, the Rch-Uralskaya railway. According to natural-historical, economic and living conditions, the region is divided into four economic regions. 1) Agricultural and cattle-breeding region - the entire B. Derbetovsky ulus, the soil of which is very favorable for farming. The entire population of the ulus lives settled. 2) The cattle-breeding and agricultural region, including the Remont-ninsky ulus cut off from the Don region, part of the M. Derbetovsky ulus up to the eastern slopes of Ergeni and the Manichesky ulus. Despite the partial occupation of the population by agriculture, the main industry here will be cattle breeding. 3) The cattle breeding region includes the eastern low-lying part of the M. Derebetovsky ulus, all, except for the western part, the Manychsky ulus and all the Volga uluses; conditions contribute to the maintenance of a nomadic way of life with the device of winter roads. 4) Fishing and cattle breeding region - the coastal parts of Erketenevsky, Yaidyko-Mogazhny, and partly the Volga uluses. The main occupation of the inhabitants is fishing. So, we see that the main] occupation of the Kalmyks is cattle breeding, and only in the coastal and Volga parts is fishing and partly farming. There is almost no industry in the region. There is only one young fish industry trust of local importance, which in 1926 produced 600 thousand poods. All farms related to the fishing industry (catchers, workers, etc.) - about 7,000 or 20% of all farms in the region. The number of catchers 'inventory is 35 ° / 0 in relation to 1913, the Kalmyks' fishing farm is recovering poorly. The reason is lack of funds. The fishing industry requires a lot of equipment costs, and there is an upward trend in agriculture. The sown area in 1913 was 26,500 dessiatines, in 1923 - 19,000 dessiatines, and in 1926 - 46,000 dessiatines. The most effective measure for restoring the economic position of the steppe is the settling of nomads. This process has already begun; sedentary farms in the region are growing, but their growth is spontaneous. Unfortunately, there is a lack of timely regulation on the part of the central bodies of the region, and the material side of this huge and most responsible business is also not taken into account. One of the reasons prompting the Kalmyks to switch to a sedentary economy is the fact that the number of livestock on nomadic farms is decreasing. “There is nothing to roam with” —this is the Kalmyk's answer to the question of the reasons for his transition to subsidence. The subsidence became especially noticeable since 1923, when the Kalmyk Central Executive Committee relocated Kalmyks in Stavropol and Orenburg provinces. and the Don region in the indigenous uluses. Chairman of the Regional Executive Committee of the Kalmyk Region 'comrade Kekeev in his report gives the following interesting figures on Soviet construction in Kalmykia. In 1912 there were 27 schools in the oblast, now 134; then there were 800 students throughout the region, now there are 9,200 students. Up to 150 students study at universities; in the region itself there is a pedagogical technical school, agricultural. a technical school, one communist party school. Before the revolution there were 8 hospitals, now there are 12; dispensary 9, now 17; before the revolution there were only 9 doctors, now there are 27; there were 30 medical assistants, now 60, and so on. In 1928 there were 123 doctors and medical assistants. The activity of the Kalmyk masses is growing with extraordinary rapidity. Up to 60 percent of the Kalmyk population took part in the last re-elections. With the growth of the activity of the masses, their needs also grow. But the region has no funds. Its budget is 90% deficient. The process of settling Kalmyks to the ground is especially successful, mainly in the border regions. Here Kalmyks • build in the absence of forests, and most importantly! guides, good peasant huts, but small and uncomfortable huts, in which the Kalmyk feels like in a cage. He reaches out to the ceiling with his head and finds it extremely difficult even in such a seemingly simple matter as setting up his household belongings. In the wagon, each object has a specific place indicated to it by tradition. Moving to settled life, the Kalmyk not only part with the wagon, together with it he breaks with all the old way of life. The Kalmyk, naturally, gets the strongest impression of contact with the new life from his new home. It should show the Kalmyk all the advantages of a permanent household and agricultural labor over his traditional companion, a wagon. That is why not quite; the correct device is now practiced for a sedentary Kalmyk, an inconvenient hut. While a relatively small part of Kalmyks settled in huts, another — a larger part — continue to live in their wagons. Poor people, usually, are not able to have a real wagon, they they live in half-kibits, which come in two tsids: "jolom" and "dekgle", which resemble simple tents. A normal Kalmyk wagon simultaneously serves as: a) the living quarters of an individual family, b) a room for all the savings of this family (food, clothing), c)a place for the performance of everyday and religious rituals, d) in the cold, a shelter for cattle (lambs, camels). The space of a wagon of average size does not exceed 9 square meters. fathoms, and not only a thing, but every living creature, occupy a place in it exactly indicated by custom. The kibitka, its furniture and dishes are the property of the family. When a new family is formed, separate parts of the wagon, precisely defined by custom, are brought by both parties — husband and wife — and then, as needed, are replenished at the expense of the family economy. For the clergy, the door of the wagon is facing east, where the Dalai Lama lives. Kalmyks, under the influence of climatic conditions, put the wagon the door to the south. The wagon of the father and, after his death, the wagon of the mother is called a large wagon, in contrast to the wagons of married sons located near the parental. The wives of their sons work in a large wagon, there and food is prepared for all. Usually all the wagons; seven I) are located in a regular circle and the distance between them is forced by a wicker fence. The formed courtyard serves as a corral for camels, and other things! livestock. All this taken together is called; the Kalmyks have “khotun” or khotoy. Now any wagon is accepted into khotons, but its owner must agree to obey the customs of khoton; by this he becomes, as it were, a relative. This type of khoton can be called composite or mixed. In the third type of khoton, the class principle is also mixed; These are khotons of the clergy, as well as zaisangs and noyons, (aristocracy), quite numerous before the revolution. The fourth type of khoton is organized according to the principle of economic and economic, it includes wagons engaged mainly in cattle breeding and most often working for the owner. Finally, the fifth. hoton type — industrial; all the wagons are engaged in one trade: fishing, salt extraction, melon growing, etc. The lack of culture and extreme slaughter of the Kalmyk people developed in addition to difficult political and economic conditions (the age-old oppression of the tsarist government and their own landowners) - also under the strong influence of the religion of Kalmyks - Lamaism (species indigenous Buddhism), which is carried out by numerous clergy, forming a special group of the population. In view of the fact that the clergy still plays a colossal role in the life of the Kalmyk people, we are somewhat Let us dwell on its organization of activity in more detail. The Kalmyk clergy, popularly called "hara-makhla" (yellow cap), lives in monasteries that always roam separately from the rest of the Kalmyks. The monastery is called a khurul, it has three kinds of wagons: temples or sacred wagons, which are always white koshem, clergy wagons and wagons of simple kad, mgko! In - the poor, shepherds, etc. Monasteries, aside from the religious [purpose, are the concentration of original Lamaic knowledge, which is distributed in four specialties: theology, astrology, medicine and painting. In each khurul there are representatives of all this knowledge, as well as their students, called. "Manzhiki" at the age of 10 to 20 years. Bakshi are teachers of faith, zukhachi are astrologers; the emcheis are doctors, the zurachi are painters. All four departments of knowledge are inseparably connected with religion and serve its purposes. Bakshi is not only a teacher of faith, but also a supreme judge, whose jurisdiction over family law matters. Along with him, zurkhachi is a participant in all events, both joyful and sad, of the Kalmyk family. Marriage, childbirth, illness, death, migration — everything is done with the participation and at the direction of the zurkhachi. The latter is responsible for: a) keeping track of the years of the marriage during marriages, b) assigning happy names to those born, c) looking for the cause of the illness, d) determining what type of burial the deceased should be given, etc. In addition, the zurkhachi makes annual calculations , determines holidays, light and difficult days, as well as the time of eclipses, predicts the onset of cold and warmth and reports various information important for the steppe economy. Kalmyks still turn to different methods of healing in case of illness, then changing one to another, then using together. Taking the medicine of a real doctor, a sick Kalmyk drinks "shulum" as prescribed by the Kalmyk spiritual healer "Emchei", listens to prayers for Golyung diseases, reads from a be (medicine man) and does not refuse the services of a wandering Tatar healer. Treatment of Kalmyk emchi, in addition to various drugs, is accompanied many rituals, of which two are of a folk character. The most radical remedy for recovery is recognized as "khyuryum" - the ransom for life. It consists in a divine service performed over the patient and is always accompanied by sacrifices from the side of the patient's family in favor of the khurul or the clergy. Such healing prayer is always performed solemnly with khurul music and numerous clergy. It requires large expenditures and is within the power of only wealthy people. For the poor, the parachute is replaced by a remedy no less curative, but cheaper, namely! - removing a sick person from the household! subject causing! illness, for example, an expensive cup, horse, of a known color, etc. Art will be found an object that is disastrous for the patient's health and indicate the method of removing it belongs to the emchei and, of course, the most beneficial way is the donation of these objects to a khurul or a clergyman. The Emcheis with their assistants, healers, are the main culprits in the extinction of the Kalmyks. A number of incredible cases can be cited regarding the treatment of diseases by these charlatans. One of the old doctors of the Kalmyk region, Dr. Tsapko, at a conference of doctors in 1921, cited many cases from his personal practice. B (ogg is the most typical: a rich Kalmyk fell ill. Emcheis flooded to him, who treated him with strong broth and at the same time forbade him to give the patient water. death to emchey and other clergy 15 horses, 1 wooden house, 2 camels, 10 cows and 25 sheep The Gelung-astrologer (zurkhachi), according to the holy books, predicted to the patient that his years were over and he should die. But the Kalmyk did not want to die and sent horses for the doctor Tsapko, who found that the patient had a normal temperature. It turns out that the charlatan Emchei, wanting to receive the promised gifts, just wanted to kill the patient without giving him water. The patient was taken to the hospital by the doctor Tsapko and recovered through meyats. Du-shan heard such a case. An 8-year-old boy fell ill with dysentery. The Emchei found that the patient should be treated with the same strong broth. The unfortunate child's thirst was so strong that he once ran out of his wagons and ran into the next one - pounced on the water. But unfortunate dark parents were chasing him and did not give him water to drink, the boy died of thirst. Almost always sick with some completely curable disease, in the Kalmyk steppe, dies and this is done with full consciousness that he was treated according to all the rules of medical art and he dies only from the fact that the end of life has come, and that here, in this world, no one is able to help him, since the book of destinies tells him to die. The Emcheys still wage an irreconcilable war with doctors, supposedly the way it should be. And gullible people, unfortunately, easily succumb to such agitation. He still highly appreciates the authority of his emcheys and quietly dies out with the direct participation of these greedy parasites.