1. General outline of the republic and the population
Chuvash Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic x) is located between the Volga and the Sura, occupying an elevation between them and a more low part along the right bank of the Volga. Of all national associations, the Chuvrespublika lies most close to the center of the USSR — it borders on the Central Industrial Region, and is only 700 miles away from Moscow. Center of the Republic - mountains. Cheboksary There is still a dispute about the origin of the Chuvash. By language, they belong to the Turkic tribe. Recently, the theory that the Chuvash are the descendants of the Bulgarians, a people who lived along the Volga and before the Tatar invasion, was a large economic and cultural center, has been actively defended. In any case, if the Chuvashs are not direct descendants of the Bulgarians, nevertheless, they were part of the Bulgarian state, as one of its large parts. Chuvash constitute the majority of the population of the republic (up to 80%); followed by Russians, Tatars and Mari. According to the census of 1926-27, the population reaches 893.687 people. In terms of population, the Chuvash ASSR has been an autonomous region since 1920, and only recently was transformed into a republic. Lenia Chuvashia is one of the largest national formations of the Volga region. Many Chuvash live outside the republic (over 500,000;. A small area of ​​the republic (19,000 square kilometers) creates a large population density. One fourth of the space is occupied by the forest, which was once much more extensive. The space occupied by the Chuvash was also large. But Russian colonization , which became especially active in the 18th century, gradually took away these vast lands and in the end the Chuvash found themselves tightly compressed in a small space. This had a disastrous effect on their economy. The Chuvash, primordial farmers, their main occupation. they were sentenced to land shortages. The tsarist government did not try to get rid of this land shortage, neither by resettlement, nor by improving the economy. Backward forms of land use (communal), technical backwardness, created complete insecurity for the Chuvash peasant. Yes, and the Chuvash land is not fertile: with frequent arid it does not yield good harvests.On average, for each peasant household there are no more than 4 dessiatines. It is necessary to note a number of backward forms in land use, which also hindered the development of the Chuvash peasant economy. These were the communities. They persisted for a long time because when cutting land to the Chuvashes after the liberation of the peasants, the land was allocated for whole villages, and sometimes together for several villages. Land surveyors dissuaded themselves from the complexity of land relations and lack of knowledge of the language. Before the war, the Chuvash economy, in most cases, could only satisfy its needs and, despite this, there was an export of grain, about 5 million poods per year. Russian capitalism has made its efforts to plunder the Chuvash people. The exploitation of the Chuvash peasants increased all the time before the revolution. They created their own bourgeoisie and their own kulak stratum, which robbed them no worse than the Russian capitalists. The economy of the poor Chuvash, which was thus under double exploitation by its growing bourgeoisie and Russian capital, fell from year to year. The cattle became smaller and decreased in number (the cost of a Chuvash horse in 1915 was half the average cost of a horse in Kazan province). Likewise, the Chuvash village did not have even the slightest economic opportunity to improve agricultural production. inventory: the plow continued to reign in the economy, the plow was a rarity. This incessant exploitation turned the Chuvash people, once rich in lands and forests, having in sufficient quantity everything necessary for their existence, into a downtrodden, deprived of land by the tsarist regime, impoverished to the point of complete impoverishment. The Chuvash lagged behind not only in the economy, but also in all other areas. The peasantry constitutes the overwhelming majority of the population of Chuvashia (931/2%) - The industry is in its infancy and the total number of workers does not exceed 1,000 people. (in industrial establishments with at least 16 workers). But handicraft is highly developed among the Chuvashes. The insecurity of their economy makes them look for outside occupations. B At present there are about 3,000 small handicraft enterprises, employing up to 3,000 people. Solitary handicraft is even more developed. Up to 110% of the entire population is engaged in handicraft trades. Both industry and handicrafts are predominantly woodworking. The average earnings of a single handicraftsman are unusually small (50-60 rubles per year). The position of the handicraftsmen before the revolution was even more difficult, since they invariably fell into exploitation by the buyers. Trade was also poorly developed among the Chuvashes. Their purchasing power was very limited. Only the most necessary things were bought in the market on a limited scale. The export was entirely concentrated in the hands of a small handful of the Chuvash and Russian bourgeoisie. From their midst, entrepreneurs sometimes stood out, possessing very significant means and conducting a large trade turnover. As in the economy the Chuvash lagged significantly behind the Russian peasant, so in everyday life they retained much of the outdated. Unsanitary conditions, widespread prevalence of domestic diseases — that is what characterizes the pre-revolutionary Chuvash village. The tsarist government was not at all concerned about getting rid of these abnormalities. It supported the preconceived notion that nothing can be helped here, since the Chuvash must inevitably degenerate. Among the Russian peasants, this created the basis for a disdainful attitude towards the Chuvash. In their beliefs and rituals, the Chuvash preserved a lot of the old, the remnants of their pagan religion are still preserved, despite the fact that for about 200 years the bulk of them were forcibly baptized. They continue to believe in a multitude of evil u0, i.e., the spread of which is caused by living conditions (dirt, unsanitary conditions, etc.) - and not by direct infection from a patient. kind spirits with whom you need to be able to get along. Having adopted Christianity, they treated Christian saints in the same way as their spirits. They tried to propitiate the saints with sacrifices. If they did not receive what they asked for, then they dealt with them: they threw away the icons, broke them, etc. Their idols kept their pagan character and were always associated with agriculture. The most important and at the same time interesting are the spring uyavas, when large round dances are held for 5-6 weeks, as well as akatui (plow's wedding), set up in front of the spring arable land. Akatui consist in games, wrestling, horse racing, etc. The remnants of family life have survived in family life. They are characterized by the power of the elder in the family, the subordination of all family members to him, the suppression of the personality of women and other traits. The elders of the clan were the keepers of the customs that governed the life of the Chuvash village. They decided all sorts of things. It was very difficult for the tsarist government to force the Chuvash to reckon with the law and courts. The Chuvashs quite rightly considered the court and laws only a means to deceive the peasantry and bring income to the Russian government and officials. The actions of the latter — bribery, intimidation, etc. — corresponded precisely to this notion. For a Chuvash peasant, who not only did not know the laws, but often did not know the Russian language, in most cases it was completely useless to go to court. Taking advantage of its darkness and oppression, all the servants of the Russian autocracy, from rural officials and sergeants to the highest ranks, robbed the Chuvashes on every occasion. Even the popes and those, in addition to their "legalized" extortions, were engaged in bribery.They frightened the Chuvashes with accusations of paganism and observance of old customs, extracting money from him for promising not to inform the “authorities”. All this understandably created hatred for the servants of the Russian autocracy and Orthodoxy. The Chuvash were least of all inclined to resort to their protection. Lynching was a frequent occurrence in the Chuvash village, which preferred to deal with criminals by their own means in accordance with old customs. In the same way, divisions, divorces, etc. were committed by the eldest of the clan without any written documents, only on the basis of his word. It seemed that under such difficult conditions of existence of the Chuvash people, the craving for enlightenment would be completely killed in it and it would never have its own culture. However, despite all the obstacles, the Chuvash were able to use those very small opportunities of enlightenment that they had before the revolution. They were able to single out, however, a small number of people who received secondary education. By the time of the revolution in Chuvashia there were up to 1,200 primary schools and 20 two-year schools. In these schools, most of the teachers were Chuvash (up to 1,800 people). This circumstance played a big role in preserving some features of identity, national feeling, language, etc. Although only the first year of study was in the Chuvash language, and the other two were in Russian, the Chuvash teachers did not expel their native language at all. For this they were subjected to frequent harassment and attacks. At one of the noble congresses (1911), a deputy from the nobility of the Kazan province, Artsybashev, accused the school authorities of instilling national and revolutionary ideas through the organization of Chuvash schools. This was, of course, far from the truth, but nevertheless, in terms of education, the Chuvash were doing better than other national minorities. The literacy of the Chuvash population is currently relatively very high (men 60 ° / o, women not less than 10 ° / o) -Since the 70th year of the last century, literature in the Chuvash language began to be published. But although up to 1,000 titles have been published since that time, these were in most cases books of spiritual content, various lives of saints, etc. None of these books, of course, gave the Chuvash peasant the opportunity to learn anything about his urgent needs in agriculture, everyday life, etc. Chuvash are very sensitive to culture and have a rich folk art, which only now has received the opportunity for further development. In the same way, the Chuvash are the most musical people of the entire Volga region. In the past, the most common instrument they used was a bubble (syrnai), now a gusli and a violin have been added to it. They also show their abilities for artistic creation and embroidery. All these are just small remains that have survived over the centuries from folk art. But they speak eloquently about the possibility of the revival of the Chuvash culture and about the desire for this on the part of the Chuvash people themselves. Unbearable living conditions forced the Chuvash to rebel against Russian rule several times: they took part in the uprising of Razin and Pugachev. The Chuvash population met the latter on the way from Kazan to Alatyr with bread and salt. The hatred for the Russifiers accumulated over the centuries resulted in the beating of officials and especially priests. But all these attempts were, of course, doomed to failure - the rebels had neither organization nor sufficient strength. Only at the dawn of 1905, when the intensified class stratification of the Chuvash countryside began, was the growth of the political consciousness of the peasantry noticed. Petty-bourgeois intellectual groups are beginning to be imbued with the idea of ​​national autonomy, they demand their "participation in the economic and cultural development of the Chuvash people, not understanding the class" character of the revolution. At the same time, the proletarianized part of the poor peasants in the Chuvash countryside begins to look for outside employment. They are faced with the general movement of the Russian proletariat, and this helps them to form their class identity. During the revolutionary movements of 1905-1907. Chuvash peasants are already putting forward quite definite revolutionary demands. Since there were almost no landowners' lands within the Chuvash region, the program of the Chuvash peasants in relation to land allotments in the event of a revolution was different from the requirements of the Russian peasantry. The Chuvash demanded the return to them of the lands that were forcibly seized during the colonization. Thus, they insisted on the allocation of land to them outside the boundaries of the Region. The movement took on a spontaneous character; peasant unions were formed, meetings were gathered all over the place and it came to bloody clashes. The movement was especially strong in Cheboksary Uyezd, where all local authorities preferred to leave their posts and hide. But after some confusion, the government begins to take repressive measures, brutally suppressing the movement, to which the peasantry responds with a series of terrorist attacks. Many of the Chuvash paid with exile or prison for such performances. In their orders to the State Duma (where the Chuvash led one Trudovik deputy), the Chuvash peasantry continued to demand the return of the land, as well as the elimination of the Russian bureaucracy and its replacement by elected authorities from the population. In addition to this spontaneous peasant movement, the activity of individual revolutionaries and revolutionary groups was rather weak. and rested on the populist-Socialist-Revolutionary ideals. The period until February 1917 was marked by reaction and further exploitation of the Chuvash peasantry. Immediately after the February revolution, the organization of the Chuvash power in the localities began, in most cases it was headed by the revolutionary leaders of 1905. The Social Revolutionary groupings gained the predominant influence and seized the national Chuvash society in Kazan, which was formed in the summer of 1917, and the newspaper "Khypar". The Union of Small Nations of the Volga Region, also created in Kazan, in which the Chuvash played an important role, dissociated itself from the political struggle, setting itself only cultural tasks. Only in the Chuvash military organizations did individual Bolshevik soldiers meet. Some councils of peasants' deputies (especially the Cheboksary one) were more Bolshevik. In the period of the February revolution, the main movements of the Chuvash people took place, thus, under the sign of purely national demands, obscuring class contradictions. Only the October Revolution posed the task of economic emancipation of the Chuvash peasantry, shaping its class consciousness. The first period of the revolution took place in the struggle of the soviets (Bolsheviks) against Cheboksarsky, headed by the Socialist-Revolutionary military Chuvash organization in Kazan. The attempts of the latter to disperse the soviets were unsuccessful, the Chuvash peasantry more and more came to understand the slogans of October and to the idea of ​​the need to support the gains of the revolution in the person of the Bolshevik soviets. But he had to endure with me, trials, before taking on the peaceful economic and cultural development. Kolchakivshchyna, which captured a number of Chuvash regions, once again showed the Chuvash all the charms of the old system. If the Chuvash intelligentsia supported Kolchak and the Socialist-Revolutionaries, then the peasantry, as the forces accumulated, entered into a struggle with them and provided substantial support to the detachments of the Soviets. After the liberation of the region from the White Guard gangs, the councils and communist organizations resumed their work, now noticeably stronger. Finally, in June 1920, the autonomous Chuvash region was created. But again, it was still impossible to start peaceful construction. The defense of the revolution demanded heroic efforts from the Chuvash too. Their best party workers went to the front. - The Chuvash peasants, who were for a long time not far from the front line, had to carry out surplus appropriations that were unbearable for an already depleted economy. And yet they not only fulfilled them completely, but even with surplus. However, this created a certain dissatisfaction in them, taking advantage of which the kulak and petty-bourgeois groups provoked an uprising against Soviet power. The latter, however, did not have solid ground, although it did a lot of harm to the very same Chuvash peasants. And, finally, the crop failure in 1920-21 and the complete crop failure in 1921-22 completely undermined the Chuvash economy and put it under the threat of complete collapse. The economy of the Chuvash peasant was already weak, due to the lack of land and continuous constraint on his land holdings, and due to the technical backwardness, the reasons for which have already been mentioned. It is impossible to describe all the unbearable suffering that arose as a result of hunger — it came down to cannibalism; rampant death raged in the Chuvash village. But this was her last disaster. After the elimination of hunger, intensive economic and cultural development began. In just three years, the pre-war standards were achieved in agriculture, and now it continues to improve further. Although slowly, but systematically, work is developing to supply the countryside with improved agricultural production. inventory, fertilizer and artificial grass seeds. A successful struggle is being waged against the threefields, and agriculture is taking solid ground. cooperation, etc. As for the industry, in the absence of the previous base, its deployment is difficult, but over the years 2 plants have arisen: starch-syrup and fruit-drying. Cultural construction is also moving rapidly. The network of schools from the pre-war period has been completely preserved, in addition to them, a number of educational institutions have been opened (pedagogical schools, agricultural technical schools, a forestry technical school, a workers' faculty, a music school, an instructor's school for woodworking, a number of 1st-level schools, a communist school, etc. :) ... The number of Chuvash students studying in higher educational institutions is constantly increasing (1925-26 — 400 people). There are newspapers, 2 periodicals, a theater, a museum, a number of cultural and educational societies, circles, and even a Chuvash-cinema, which has begun to release its pictures from Chuvash life. The village is also covered by a number of political and educational institutions (cottages, reading rooms, clubs, circles, etc.). There is a vigorous fight against common diseases; the number of medical institutions is increasing. Party organizations are gaining more and more popularity among the poor and middle peasant groups of the village, who, taking shape as a class, are the most active builders of the future of Chuvashia. It would be necessary to say a lot in order to understand the significance of the economic, political and cultural upsurge of the Chuvash people. We will only talk about a part of it — about working with women.