1. Brief geographical overview of Tajikistan
Tajikistan is a country of mountains, one of the majestic mountainous countries of the whole world, located in the southeastern part of Central Asia and our Soviet Union. From the north, Tajikistan is limited by the Kara-Kirghiz Autonomous Region and the Uzbek SSR, from the east by China, from the south by Afghanistan and from the west by the territory of our Union, that is, the same Uzbek SSR. The largest part of Tajikistan's area is made up of mountain ranges with spurs and plateaus, between which there are few valleys. The mountain system of Tajikistan is the western spurs of the world's greatest upland, the Pamirs, which occupies the entire eastern part of the country and extends further beyond its borders. Mountain ranges go from East to West, gradually lowering and turning into hilly spurs. All these ridges are extremely difficult to pass. The passes are abundant, but mainly for pack traffic, and they are located at an altitude that sometimes reaches 2 versts. The tops of the mountain ranges are covered with snow and ice everywhere, and the slopes, steeper to the south and more sloping to the north, are occasionally covered with very poor shrub vegetation. In the eastern part of the country, tree vegetation is completely absent, as the area is replete with desert plateaus, rocky and sandy soil. The slopes of the mountains! Are usually dissected by deep gorges, along which stormy rivers rush with noise. The aforementioned torus chains, due to their difficult passability, since ancient times have served as a reliable protection for the Tajik people from any conquerors. As for the flat area, it makes up a very small percentage of the total area of ​​the country. The valleys of Tajikistan are covered with agricultural crops, partly swampy, partly occupied by vast thickets of giant reeds or sands. Mountain rivers, starting from massive glacial spaces or lakes located at an inaccessible height, rapidly rush downward, running now narrow, now wide valleys and in places diverge along artificial canals (irrigation ditches), irrigating agricultural! • fields, and sometimes at all. disappearing among them, without reaching the river or sea (r. Zerav-shan). The most prominent rivers in Tajikistan are the following: r. SurkhOb, Zeravshan, Kafir-nigan, Pyanj, etc. It is not hard to guess that with such a geological structure Tajikistan has valuable mineral deposits and springs, although, according to experts, this area has been geologically explored very little. It is interesting to note that in some places the hot mineral springs were here with a fountain and the soil is so hot that mutton can be freely baked in a dug hole covered with an iron sheet. All these riches are not used at all due to the country's backwardness. The climatic conditions of Tajikistan are quite consistent with its geological structure, but very rarely correspond to the geographical position of the country. Thus, being located at the same latitude as southern Italy, Tajikistan has an average winter temperature approximately equal to that of Holland (+ 2 ° C), and an average summer temperature equal to that of sowing. Africa (- | -40 ° C). “As the mountains rise, the climate becomes more severe and on the peaks, reaching 6 versts in places, it becomes close to the polar one. The average temperature in the Pamirs is lower, it is in the Arkhangelsk province. With regard to the surface conditions and climate, vegetation develops here. The flat areas of Tajikistan are occupied by steppe areas, wide reed thickets along the river banks and abundant orchards growing: peaches, apricots, grapes and other fruits. Mountain areas of moderate altitude differ from the plains by the presence of already forest lands and thickets of bushes (wild rose, barberry, etc.). Finally, the highest belt, in contact with glaciers, is strewn with only sparse grass (feather grass, wormwood) and low shrub vegetation. Of the cereals in Tajikistan, millet, barley and corn are widespread. The most common types of tree species here are: birch, poplar and juniper, the latter being an excellent construction material, convenient for fuel and coal. The vegetation of the country as a whole is extremely diverse and groups in itself various types of plants from subtropical to polar. The fauna of Tajikistan also reflected in itself all the originality of this typical mountainous country. In the highest places (Pamir region), a variety of feathered predators is striking, special breeds of which, such as: snow vultures, bearded vultures, etc., reign over these places and instill fear not only on herds, but also on a person who inadvertently found himself over steepness along the way. With the blows of its wings, the predator knocks its prey into the abyss and there it easily deals with it. Among the mammals of this region, a special breed of working cattle "Kutasy" and a large breed of sheep (with a white mane on the neck), reaching 15-20 poods, should be noted. weight.In low-lying places, the fauna is much richer and more diverse. There is an abundance of reptiles here: steppe boa constrictor, spectacle snake,mountain agama, etc. There are many! different species of birds, of which are interesting: the Zeravshan pheasant, the so-called "blue bird" and the green woodpecker. Mammals can be noted for the following rare species: the horned goat, the Amudarya deer, the Bukhara hyena, etc. In the river reed thickets, you can also find the tiger.In general, the geographical appearance of Tajikistan is very different from the adjacent territories of the Soviet Union, and in its geological structure is a world rarity in general. The sharp forms of the surface, with its dizzying abysses, sky-high heights, bubbling streams, a variety of climate, diversity of flora and fauna, have left their inevitable imprint on the life of the local population, on its economy, cultural level, everyday life and social order.

2. Administrative structure and national economy of the country.
Tajikistan, as an independent state organism, in the form of the Autonomous SS of the Republic, was formed at the end of 1924, making up part of the Uzbek SSR. Before the October Revolution, Tajikistan was administratively defeated between Turkestan and Bukhara. Tajikistan stood out as an independent state unit as a result of the national demarcation of Central Asia. , the resolution on which was unanimously passed at the congresses of the soviets b. Turkestan and Bukhara Sov. Republics and approved in the same year at the All-Russian and All-Union Congresses of Soviets. Pre-revolutionary Tajikistan, being mainly the territory of the Bukhara emir, was administratively divided into beks, headed by beks or local princes. These administrative units were at the same time tax-paying areas, since the entire agricultural mass of the population paid the emir to levy for the land. Bekstva divided the territory in relation to the economic features of the area and their borders in most cases coincided with the course of rivers. After the national demarcation of Central Asia, the Tajik Autonomous Sots. Sov. The republic is administratively divided into 8 wilay eto v, which roughly correspond in area to the counties of our central Russia. Each vilayet is divided into tumu, corresponding to the volosts, and the tumu fall into kents or villages (kishlaks), with an independent agricultural society in each. The vilayet region includes from 2 to 6 tumen; there are 35 tumen in all 8 vilayets of the republic. The capital of Tajikistan is mountains. Du-shambe, which is located in its western part and is a very insignificant group of poor native buildings, although with the formation of an administrative center here, any construction began to develop widely. It should be noted that the close connection of Tajikistan with Uzbekistan in geographical and administrative relations is mixed the composition of the population in cities and large villages caused in places abnormal phenomena of "Uzbekization" of the Tajik population in the points officially considered Uzbek. An intensified struggle is being waged against this, which has certain results in favor of the Tajiks. For example, the Kannibadam region of Uzbekistan, inhabited mainly by Tajiks, has now received autonomy, the Institute of Education in Tashkent, where mainly Tajiks study, has been transferred to the direct jurisdiction of the Tajik A.S. S. of the Republic, etc. The national economy of the country in Tajikistan has several peculiar forms, determined by its geographical features. Overall, Tajikistan is a typical agricultural country. High mountain villages of Tajiks are of the farm type and are characterized by a small number of households, with a large composition of families (13-15 people), moreover, family divisions, fragmentation of the economy are generally not typical for Tajikistan, if they occur, then only among the inhabitants valleys, but not mountainous regions. The higher the terrain, the less frequent the population, the more difficult the struggle with nature, the more amicable, therefore, it is united by the commonality of its economic interests. The aforementioned farmsteads are usually located along the sources of rivers. The villages along the middle reaches of the rivers and the middle upland of the country have a slightly different type. Here the land becomes more needed, thanks to the more abundant moisture and hot sun, more crowded population and therefore greater value. Hence, kishlaks are more extensive, with more closely adjoining buildings. In a word, the village begins to acquire the usual form of a mountain village - an aul, adhered to the slope of the ridge and is the most typical for Tajikistan in general. There is a tendency towards sections, that is, to be separated into independent farms. Families number 6-8 people. The very type of Tajik villages reveals the primitive state of the household and agriculture of the population. All the necessary funds for the economy are taken mainly from the surface of the earth, namely: buildings are made mainly of stone, housing is heated more often! total dried, pressed manure (m (dung) and brushwood, for lack of forest, eats the population mainly by products of agriculture, cattle breeding, hunting, etc., etc. The main areas of the local economy in Tajikistan are also closely dependent on the land surface and climatic conditions. In the highest region (Gorno-Badakhshan), hunting, dairy farming, and other non-agricultural trades are developed. Agriculture is widespread on the slopes of mountain ranges, however, here it is not the main source of subsistence, which is why the population is forced to engage in side trades: burning coal, collecting herbs for making paints, developing various household implements, etc. Inhabitants of the lowest regions, on the contrary, are mainly engaged in agriculture: rice, mulberry trees for the production of silk, fruit orchards, etc. In addition, sheep breeding is also practiced, but not to the same extent as in mountainous regions. The higher the terrain, the less sown area per person, but more livestock and vice versa. In the high mountainous areas, 100 people. of the population cultivate only 13 acres of crops, with livestock in 111 heads, while on the plains per 100 people there are 75 to 94 dess. sown area and only 50-65 head of livestock. Tajiks cultivate the land with a plow (aspor), a spade (belle) and a pick (kilyand). The grain is threshed with a special block (chapor), which the bull drags over the laid sheaves, and the cargo is transported even in summer on a special sleigh (chigina). A means of transportation, except for horses, is a special breed of cattle called "kutasy", on which all field work is carried out. In terms of their production, various types of agriculture in Tajikistan are in the following ratio: in the first place is field cultivation, which gives 75% of the total production, in the second place is horticulture, 10%, in the third livestock-8 ° / o, then viticulture, horticulture and poultry farming. On average, one person has an income of 28 rubles. per year, moreover, a tithe of land gives an income of 24 rubles. and a unit of livestock — 4 rubles. From these figures it is clear how insignificant the profitability of the working agricultural population of Tajikistan is and how poor this country is now. '' In addition to agriculture, mention should be made of the state of underground treasures, which, however, have been very little explored due to the peculiarities of the surface. It must be said that in Tajikistan there is a territory in the center of its eastern part, with an area of ​​approximately 3000 sq. kilometers, which until now has not been explored at all and does not have its own cartography. As for the discovered underground treasures, they do not differ in their size and present the following picture. In the river basin The Zeravshan and its tributaries have deposits of coal, approximately in the ZUg of a billion poods of the total reserve, in addition, coal seams have been observed in other places. Due to the difficulties of transportation, there is no normal exploitation, and at present coal is mined by the local population in a primitive way for personal consumption. For coal, in terms of their power, there are hot sulfur springs, located mainly near the Obi-Garm city, and, finally, gold mines can be attributed to the mining industries, which, however, should be understood in a very primitive sense. Gold is mined from river water (the Zeravshan River), which with its swift current lifts up golden circles, which are caught by trapping Them in the wool of spaced lamb skins. In addition to the listed treasures, there are deposits of lead, iron ore, ammonia and sulfur in Tajikistan. All this, however, was discovered in very small sizes. The extremely poor development of communication routes, the inconvenience of the surface and the remoteness from the cultural centers of Tajikistan, to a large extent determine the neglected state of its minerals, which could, under other conditions, be of great help to the needy population. The main factor of the economic well-being of any country, the communication routes, are here in a too unfavorable form, which is a significant obstacle to the economic growth of Tajikistan. Local communication routes are subdivided into unpaved and river ones, and the former, in turn, are divided into wheeled and pack routes. There are no railways in Tajikistan. The Guzar-Derbent-Dushambe-Faizabad highway is of paramount importance among wheel roads. The nearest railway station of the Central Asian railway. The village of "Guzar" is 266 versts from Dushambe. Both wheeled and pack roads in Tajikistan are very poor in bridges, which in most cases are not safe for crossing. Due to this state of the bridges, in the spring the floods of rivers completely stop the movement and therefore communication between settlements is interrupted in places. The rivers of Tajikistan are almost inaccessible for navigation, thanks to the many pitfalls that make traffic dangerous. Crossing them are practiced on rafts, and sometimes just by swimming.

3. Population, its social structure, occupation and life.
The main population of Tajikistan is the people, by whose name this country has now received its name, i.e. Tajiks, sos representing 65% of the total population. They are followed by Uzbeks and Turkmens, of which they account for up to 30%; finally, Kyrgyz, Arabs, Jews, Russians and representatives of other nationalities live here, the number of which is insignificant. Before the revolution, there were 1,294,000 people in Tajikistan. (according to the census of 1917), but at present the ego of quantities © has decreased by about one third. The reason for this circumstance was the massive resettlement to other regions and even abroad (to Afghanistan), due to the ruin of farms during the war and Basmachism. The south-western region suffered the most, where the population decreased by 60% against 30-40% of other regions. The Basmachi brought a lot of devastation and all kinds of disasters to Tajikistan. For three years this area represented an almost continuous battlefield, where the already meager national economy of the country was destroyed to the ground. In terms of its inner content, Basmachism represented a civil war between the reactionary elements of the country and the Soviet regime. Its main forces were the old feudal circles, the ulema, as well as the ignorant, fanatical element of the general population, whose political consciousness was awakening very slowly. The Emir of Bukhara, who owned the territory of Tajikistan before the revolution, united and inspired this movement from abroad, often using the services of British agents, Turkish officers and other foreign elements. The abstract pan-Islamist slogans of Basmachism were not clear to the broad peasant masses. The fight against him was carried out by combined military and social measures (clarification of the essence of the movement, the involvement of the population in Soviet construction, etc.), thanks to which the Basmachi were outlived. The total number of Tajiks is estimated at about 400 thousand people. In addition, they also live outside their republic, in the north. the eastern slope of the Himalayas and in Afghanistan, moreover, their number in the latter is much greater, even than in the USSR. Modern researchers consider Tajiks to be the most ancient inhabitants of Wed. Asia, which, only due to the geographical features of the country, have survived here in such numbers, while other representatives of the Iranian tribe, as a result of numerous conquests Cf. Asia, were exterminated or assimilated. Thus, modern Tajiks are descendants of the ancient Iranian element, once glorious for its culture. According to the areas of settlement and by their type, the Tajiks can be divided into mountainous and lowland. The latter, naturally, mingled more with their conquerors than the former, who sometimes retained the purest appearance of an Iranian-Aryan to this day. The great cultural past of their ancestors could not pass without a trace even for modern Tajiks, leaving its imprint on their character, appearance and everyday life. life. The Tajik certainly stands out among other peoples inhabiting the Wed. Asia. First of all, this is manifested in his stubborn diligence and thoughtful attitude to his farm. Even from those general information about the state of the national economy, which are given above, one can easily conclude what tremendous energy is required from a Tajik peasant to run his household in the face of such a difficult struggle with nature. In the city, a Tajik is as great a craftsman as a farmer in a village. Possessing a higher cultural level, the Tajik is less militant than the surrounding Turkic peoples. He is not withdrawn and loves social gatherings very much. In the winter, when field work stops, a kind of club associations (dzhura) are organized, which gather for conversations and rest in specially equipped rooms (chai-ha'ne). Even the poor mountaineers who go to winter work in cities or large villages gather here, as a rule, in their friendly community, arranging treats for a pool, and rest in the circle of fellow countrymen. At the mosques, special rooms are set up, called "alau-khane", where men gather around the fire, for a common meal, also composed on a collective basis. The characteristic features of the appearance of a Tajik are: medium height, strong muscular arms and legs, dark brown and sometimes gray eyes, dark blond hair and a proportional physique, without excessive obesity or thinness. There are, of course, other types, some resembling an Indian, others even similar to our Great Russian peasant. Very, characteristic is the manner of speaking slowly and walking slowly. With a calm, unhurried gait, a Tajik can walk all day through the mountains and gorges, without taking long breaks, and his endurance in this respect is simply amazing. The most common clothing of the prevailing agricultural population is the following: a light paper robe (yakta), which put on directly on the body, a rough belt (futa) encircling this robe, white pants (lo-winter), gathered in boots and rough work shoes (masi) out! rawhide in the form of boots. In winter, wears a quilted, and sometimes a sheepskin robe, knee length and belted. A gray paper bandage (turban) is wrapped around the head, or a simple skullcap is put on. Social stratification among the Tajiks is extremely insignificant, because, as mentioned above, this nationality is a predominantly agricultural, peasant mass, existing in an almost subsistence economy. True, Tajikistan knows a very prominent group of Tajik merchants, clergy, civil servants and other representatives of the urban population, but it is so insignificant in size that it is necessary to speak about it only in passing. According to the data of pre-revolutionary times, the urban population numbered only 55,000 people per 1.200.000 people of the rural population, i.e. about 5%. In percentage terms, the number of the urban population has now remained approximately the same, if not reduced. Cities here should be understood as trade, craft and administrative centers — that's all. True, there are three ginneries in Tajikistan, built last year, and one soap factory, which employs several dozen laborers. In addition, there is a fairly large number of out-work workers (20 thousand), but they are not yet united in any way. The "Koshchi" union, corresponding to the Vserabotzemles trade union, which has expanded its activities in Uzbekistan, does not work here yet. This is mainly due to the difficulty of uniting the workers according to the conditions of the area and, in addition, to the lack of material resources, although the need for; Therefore, if we talk about social stratification, then we should bear in mind only a small group of Tajik merchants who inhabit mainly the cities: Ura-Tyube, Gissar, Samarkand, Bukhara, Dushambe, etc., the agricultural nobility — shahs, worlds, beks, etc. — have long been swept away by the revolution. The life of a Tajik merchant, mullah or other representative of the urban population, first of all, is not at all characteristic of the Tajik nationality. This is explained by the fact that such an element was almost completely assimilated with the Uzbeks. Suffice it to point out as an illustration that the urban Tajiks of Uzbekistan teach their children not in their native language, but in the Uzbek dialect, while the inhabitants of the cities of Tajikistan naturally gravitate towards their Uzbek brothers, due to their common interests. The urban family has a spirit of extraordinary routine and slavish adherence to old religious traditions, which cannot be noticed to such an extent among the population of the village. Here we see a characteristic group of farm laborers, which in most cases is made up of the village poor, who give themselves up for a certain period at the complete disposal of the owner. The farm laborer goes after the horse, serves the guests in the male part of the house and does all the black! work, moreover, does not receive any salary, but lives on! the maintenance of the owner, occasionally acquiring gifts in the form of money or cuts of the manufacture. Having made a little money for himself, received from the owner, and sometimes "tea" from the guests, with the end of the term of employment, he mounts a donkey and travels far into the mountains to his Fig. 2. Dwelling of a mountain Tajik family. Due to the above circumstances, when describing the life of a Tajik, his occupations and cultural level, we will adhere to the Tajik farmer, as the type of the most characteristic and widespread! The dwelling of a mountain Tajik is a very simple and pitiful structure: The flat roofs of small huts are overgrown with grass and the dark walls sometimes twisted sideways. Wicker fences coated with clay look very sad. The walls of the hut are made about 3 arshins high from small stones, also covered with clay mixed with straw. There are no okoi, there are one or two holes that serve both for light and smoke. The roof is made of thin beams, on which brushwood is applied, and all this is abundantly smeared with clay, and, at the top, another hole is left for smoke. The entrance is through one door, which is locked from the inside on a turntable. Around the house there is a courtyard surrounded by a palisade or a wattle fence coated with clay. The dwelling of a flat Tajik has a completely different picture. It is spacious and high, built of bricks, cleaned up and painted with various patterns. All around there are buildings, vegetable gardens, and sometimes gardens. Inside the walls are adobe hills for sleeping. A lamp is stuck in the wall, that is, a rod coated with some kind of combustible substance. Along the elevations along the walls, goatskin or sheep skins lie in steles. Fire is carved from flint (chamok) with flint. This is the home of a Tajik. Of course, it has significant shortcomings, and above all, dampness and drafts, these inevitable companions of any poor home, spreading pulmonary diseases and rheumatism. It must be said that in some villages for the winter seern special premises are being built by collective efforts, in which several families live at the same time. These are actually the same buildings, but with thicker walls and a roof. As we already know, Tajiks have been farmers from time immemorial, and they categorically avoid invasions of land use. Grain plants are sown here: wheat, barley and millet, as well as peas, beans and in some places corn, sunflowers are planted, cotton and so on. The communal ownership of land is completely unknown here and the Tajik is the complete owner of his own plot, with the exception of pastures, where, however, by inheritance, everyone has his own plot in use. Cotton growing is of great importance in the life of some regions (Pyanj). Cotton here almost completely replaces cereals, and every house has its own cotton farm. Residents not only pick cotton, but also produce various fabrics from it in an artisanal way. Everywhere there is a loom, which is used to produce the paper material “mata”, which is popular among Tajiks. Weaving is usually done in winter, when field work and cattle grazing cease. In addition to field cultivation and cotton growing, the inhabitants of Pavnin are engaged in gardening and sericulture. Dried apples are used by Tajiks not only in their whole form, but also ground into flour. Grinding of mulberry fruit is especially common. The latter is also divorced for its intended purpose, i.e. for the purpose of sericulture. Unfortunately, the production of silk is so primitive that the fabrics come out extremely rough. However, the shortage in the production of silk fabrics is covered by the high art of embroidery with multicolored silk threads, widespread among the population, which in some places achieves amazing success. Finally, it is necessary to dwell on another important branch of Tajik agriculture - cattle breeding. The vast mountain pastures of Tajikistan have always contributed to the development of this ancient type of economy here. The vast majority of livestock in Tajikistan are cattle, which are used for both food and labor. With the onset of warm spring days, the owner of the herd usually leaves his village and goes to look for pasture, where he builds an unpretentious hut and remains in the bosom of nature until the onset of cold days. Milk and sour cream are the staple foods in every family, while wool and leather go to fabrics and shoes. The listed occupations, however, do not fully provide for the Tajik mountaineers, and therefore latrines are common. In the fall, when the field work ends, the mountaineers go to. the nearest large cities: Samarkand, Tashkent, Pend-Zhakend, etc., where they are usually hired for the dirtiest and most difficult work: they dig wells, carry weights, guard shops, houses, etc. at night, and sometimes, as indicated, they simply enter servants to wealthy townspeople. Religious beliefs of Tajiks are very simple and do not differ at all with the fanaticism that can be found among other inhabitants of the mountains; By their religion, they are Sunni Muslims, but among them there are adherents of one of the Muslim sects, Ishmaelism, who live mainly along the Panju River. Their number, however, is not great. The overwhelming majority of Tajiks, settled in mountain villages, retained along with Islam their old pre-Islamic beliefs. They believe in good and evil spirits. The first are called "maidens" or "divas" and live in the mountains, in the form of a gigantic man with a terrible face. From the blow of the diva with his fist on the ground, all sorts of rock-rolls occur, sometimes destroying entire villages. Divas guard gold, silver in grains and can bring various disasters to a person. To prevent themselves from the intrigues of divas, Tajiks' wear a talisman, i.e. yo. a simple piece of paper with the inscription: "bismillahir-rahmanir-rahimi", that is, "In the name of the Lord, the merciful, the merciful", which is folded into the shape of a triangle. Good spirits are called in some places "firishtya", in some "bets" and have the appearance of a beautiful * woman who protects a person from any danger if he leads a virtuous life. In its purest form, Islam is practiced in large cities, where the population was under the influence of a vast spiritual class and is often distinguished by significant fanaticism. The deeper into the mountains, the weaker the beliefs of Islam, the less it left its imprint on the life of a Tajik. However, Tajiks have long been Muslims, and it must be admitted that the influence of Islam on the life of this nation as a whole, as well as on the life of each family separately, has its enormous * concrete consequences, which are primarily reflected in the position of a Tajik woman.