1. General outline of the Mordovians
Mordva is the most numerous of the East Finnish tribes. It scattered over the vast expanse of the Middle Volga region and adjacent areas, and there is a lot of it in Siberia as a result of resettlement in search of better lands. However, the bulk of it is located in the middle Volga region (Gubernia Penza, Ulyanovsk, Saratov, Samara, Tambov, Nizhegorodskaya, Tatrespublyka) - in the places of its old settlements. This scattering leads to the fact that, despite its large numbers, the Mordovians do not constitute the majority in any province or even in the district. Here and there it is interspersed among the Russian population, and only in a few places does it form more significant groups — nair., In the Penza province. and in the Ulyanovsk (Ardatovsky u.) Therefore, the Mordovians do not have their own region, as we see with other national minorities, although they outnumber them; - in those places where it constitutes the bulk of the population, Mordovian volosts are organized, i.e. - e. smaller national units. In total, 1,340,000 Mordovians are considered in the USSR (census of 1926). The female sex predominates — there are 120-125 women per 100 men. Mordovia is divided into 2 large branches — the Moksha and Erzyan. The first prevails in Penza Gubernia, the second in Nizhny Novgorod and Ulyanovsk. In terms of numbers, Erzya slightly exceeds Moksha. Their linguistic differences are quite significant — they also differ in a number of everyday features. Erzya is mostly blond, while Moksha has a greater variety: along with blondes, brunettes with a dark skin color. In terms of their external life (buildings, clothes, etc.), the Mordovians are not so sharply different from the Russians - they are more other national minorities (it was subjected to Russification, scattered in small groups among the bulk of the Russian population. But nevertheless, in some places it still retained its original customs, especially this must be said about the Mordovians of the Penza province. This scattering has led to a significant variety of external life in different localities (for example, a variety of clothes, etc.). A number of everyday features, language - all this still fundamentally distinguishes the Mordovians from neighboring peoples. The initial settlements of the Mordovian people occupied the space between the Volga, Oka and Sura rivers, and from here, then under the pressure of the Russians, they were forced, gradually moving to the east, to settle in a wider area. They began at the beginning of the XII century. and the first time ended not in favor of the Russians. But over time, the pressure of the Russians became stronger and more energetic - they were attracted by the rich lands and forests occupied by the Mordovians and other peoples, and even more attracted by the great Volga route, along which there was a lively, large trade. In addition to the small number and fragmentation, the Mordovians were placed at a disadvantage in this struggle, due to the fact that they occupied an intermediate position all the time: first, between the Russians and the Bulgarians (a large trading state along the Volga and Kama before the Mongol invasion, that is, until the XIII century .), and then between Russians and Tatars. Thus, it was exerted, as it were, double pressure, and had to dodge between the two sides. But nevertheless, supported first by the Bulgarians, and then by the Tatars against the Russians, the Mordovians retained a certain independence, until the fall of Kazan. At the same time, Erzya had great independence, while Moksha, soon after the Tatar invasion, was forced to take into its environment a number of Tatar Murzas and princes who ruled over it. Erzya had her princes and fought with the Russians: with the help of the Tatars, for which she sometimes paid with cruel retribution from the Russians. But in general, the Mordovians, being quite peace-loving, most often tried not to enter the fight, hiding in the impenetrable forests of their region, but since they were compressed more and more tightly, they responded with a decisive struggle. But she still did not fight the Russians. It had enough strength, and during the conquest of Kazan, it peacefully submitted to the Moscow state. This subordination entailed, first of all, a decrease in the land holdings of the Mordovians. First, empty lands were taken from it, and then gradually cultivated, as well as forest possessions were taken away. the turn caused a change in the economic structure of the Mordovians. Having previously owned large forest areas, she was mainly engaged in hunting and beekeeping, although agriculture was quite developed. Hunting and beekeeping were now decreasing due to the fact that the Mordovians (Gradually lost their possessions. In addition, to the Mordovians a number of duties were imposed, the implementation of which was hard on the farm, and in addition, she was robbed Russian officials and clergy. It was easy for the latter to do this — the Mordovians did not know Russian laws, and their complaints were not taken into account. Mordovians carried out patrol service in the troops, under Peter I carried ship work, etc. In order to further weaken the Mordovians as a national whole, and break their resistance, which often manifested itself in bloody uprisings, she was forced to be baptized. Most often, it took place with the help of armed force, intimidation, and when this did not succeed, they were lured into being baptized with various benefits. Despite this, for a long time the Mordovians kept the pagan beliefs of their ancestors, and having adopted Christianity, they mixed it with these beliefs. On the basis of the forced conversion to Christianity, indignations of the Mordovians often occurred. One of these is known under the name of Teryu-shchevskogsgbunt (1743-44). Bishop Dmitry Sechenov (Nizhny Novgorod province) began to take too drastic measures to interbreed Mordovians and eradicate pagan rites. He began to destroy the Mordovian cemeteries, which they consider the most sacred, since they have a highly developed veneration of their ancestors, as well as Mordovian prayers (places for pagan prayers). At the same time, he used force and deliberately set the Russians against the Mordovians. The Mordovians who had suffered until now put up resistance. The military was called in. Mordovians scattered across the forests, leaving both property and bread in the fields. The team was instructed: "If they do not get baptized, catch them, whip them Mercilessly and baptize them involuntarily." But the Mordovians did not leave the forests until the onset of the winter cold. The cold, inevitably, drove her to her native places, occupied by soldiers and completely ruined. Even more irritated by this devastation, the Mordovians begin to join the troops in real battles, in one of which only 74 people were killed. After the uprising was pacified, part of the Mordovians was sent to Nizhny for reprisals. To clarify the methods of baptism, the complaint of the Mordovians, which they wrote to Sechenov, is interesting. It indicated that they were being held in chains, tortured and tortured in all possible ways, just to obtain consent to baptism. Mordva, in turn, answered: "We will all die at the same time, but we will not allow ourselves to be baptized." However, the force did its thing — not the priests, so the gendarmes and the soldiers christened the Mordovians. The latter, therefore, especially hated priests and officials, and in her uprisings hurried to deal with them. The uprisings of the Mordovians were thus caused by a general policy of oppression, its landlessness, and various oppressions that undermined at (the end of its economy. In the Time of Troubles (early 17th century), the Mordovians formed a special army under the command of their elected people, Moskov and Vokardin, and approached Nizhniy Novgorod. The latter has long been the mainstay of Russian rule in the Mordovian region, and against this point Mordovians directed their efforts, hoping in the person of him to break the Russian power in general. But they did not succeed in taking Nizhniy, they limited themselves to the devastation of the environs. The land was ablaze with uprising. Mordovians, of course, did not think about either Shuisky or the impostor, she fought for the lands taken from her, for her freedom — against Russian power in general. On the basis of these demands, the Mordovians united with the Chuvash and Cheremis and stubbornly fought against Taking Alatyr, first of all, they destroyed the hated (monastery and drowned the governor and the hegumen in Sura, and when the monks chose the second hegumen but, he suffered the same fate, the third chosen one was thrown from the tower, and at the same time the monks were dispersed so that no more elections could be made. The same was done with officials. The governors, in turn, took revenge on the rebellious Mordovians cruelly. In one report about a major battle with the Mordovians, Cheremis and Chuvash, voivode Sheremetev, intoxicated by victory over the rebels, writes: “they trampled on and! and they stabbed that pigs, and their corpses were laid seven miles away. " The revolt of the Mordovians, then subsiding, then renewing, continued until 1615. After the Time of Troubles, the situation of the Mordovian people deteriorated even more. A whole series of new taxes, new duties, and with them restrictions forced a lot of Mordovians to scatter "wherever they look," into the forests, etc. Since that time, the desire for resettlement begins. We have already talked about how they were converted to Christianity at that time. All this again caused unrest and uprisings that broke out here and there — the discontent of the Mordovians did not stop. And now, during the Razin uprising, she again rises without exception, makes up detachments under the command of either the Razin people or her elected officials and begins the struggle for liberation from unbearable oppression. The governors who pacified the rebellion had to endure especially fierce battles in the Mordovian areas, where the detachments of the rebels reached several thousand people. A lot of people were killed, a lot of villages were burned out and ravaged, and gallows were placed along the roads, on which the hanged people swayed “for edification.” The same thing happened in the Pugachev region. Mordva joined the rebels, fighting the autocracy, clergy and bureaucracy. In one place. Mordovians asked Pugachev for permission to return them to his Mordovian thief, having previously destroyed the churches. It should be noted that the majority of the Mordovians were state peasants, there were few landowners among them — they belonged directly to the Romanovs' house, therefore their indignation was always directed against representatives of the autocracy in the localities — officials and clergy. After the Pugachevism among the Mordovians, desperate to achieve anything through an open struggle with the autocracy, other moods arise, pouring out into religious utopian movements. Deprived of their lands, their former independence, oppressed at every step and not seeing salvation in their own strength, the Mordovians begin to wait for salvation from somewhere above, in addition to their own forces. At the beginning of the XIX century. this resulted in an interesting movement known as the sermon of Kuzma Alekseev, the prophet of the Mordovians - Teryukhan, which, of course, was the result of the same economic and political enslavement. Kuzma preached that the day will come when the Mordovians will again become a great people, and the Mordovian law and faith will rule over the whole earth. Kuzma's sermon found a warm response among the exhausted Mordovians, and Mordovians flocked from all sides to listen to their prophet. But the government did not like this, although the movement was peaceful. The leaders of the movement were captured, and reprisals were perpetrated against them, and the movement itself was presented as a fanaticism that almost reached the level of human sacrifice. Subsequently, the discontent of the Mordovians manifested itself in exactly this two ways. On the one hand, it had a peaceful and religious character: among the Mordovians, various sects began to spread extremely widely ("God's people", etc.), where they were seeking liberation from life's hardships in a departure from reality to religion. On the other hand, the Mordovians, along with the Russian peasantry, participated in a number of peasant movements, in the revolutions of 1905 and 1917. The revolution of 1905 caused, for example, extremely strong uprisings in the Saratov province. ! and other places. From the Mordovians, more from the intelligentsia, even before 1917 a number of active party workers emerged. In 1905, there was even an attempt to declare an independent Mordovian republic. Unfortunately, we do not have detailed materials on this interesting case. In the October Revolution, the Mordovians took a very active part. From among them, cadres of responsible workers and fighters of the revolution were immediately promoted. It can be said without exaggeration that in districts with a Mordovian population, the demands of the revolution (tax in kind, the fight against whites, etc.) were much better fulfilled. At the same time, the cultural and economic growth of the Mordovians began. Back in 1917, the Mordovian cultural and educational society was organized. After the October Revolution, the growth of the class consciousness of the Mordovian peasantry begins, expressed, as we have already said, in supporting the revolution with everything that the peasantry could give it, in the growth of political, educational and cultural ones. I can point to the example of Ardatovskiy u., Ulyanovsk province, where I spent the years of the revolution (muzzles, population about 500/0) institutions. Where there was a significant Mordovian population, the Mordovians for the first time had the opportunity to take part in government, and if earlier the Mordovians were afraid to approach institutions even close, then after the October Revolution we see its representatives in the councils, courts and other authorities. In the Mordovian villages, committees of the poor, party cells are organized, and for the first time the organized Mordovian poor get the opportunity to solve pressing issues themselves.! Mordovian departments are organized under the People's Commissariat of Education, then the People's Commissariat of Education, under the gubernias and other institutions. As in the entire Volga region, the Mordovians were also affected the famine of 1921 and the civil war, which in many cases affected the Mordovian regions, the more so that the main occupation of the Mordovians is agriculture (98% of the Mordovians are engaged in agriculture). The economy of the Mordovians experienced significant upheavals in those years, and efforts were spent in the subsequent years to overcome them. It is still generally accepted that the Mordovians have significant economic advantages. As proof of this, they are smeared with her lower debt and more serviceable payment of taxes and taxes (in pre-revolutionary (time). This is true only for the last statement. For hundreds of years, the intimidated and oppressed Mordovians got used to fulfill all requirements and duties to avoid repression, no matter how It must also be said that the Mordovians, being a stubborn and good worker, often, of course, achieved better results in agriculture. Meanwhile, her land allotments are no more than the allotments of Russian peasants. If we take the figures for 1925, then for the Penza province The Mordovians have 1.39 dessiatines per eater, while the Russians have 1.73 dessiatines.The Mordovians are provided with livestock somewhat better than the Russian peasants, but they lagged behind in the use of improved agricultural implements. its land holdings are significantly decreasing (in 1866 — there were slightly more P / a dess. per capita — now 1.39). The result of this in the past was widespread resettlement among the Mordovians. However, it doesn't help much either. At present, the question is being raised of improving the quality of cultivation "of the land, so that it can achieve greater results on the same area. Something has already been done in this direction. The area of ​​industrial crops is increasing, early fallow, multi-field is introduced, the quality of seeds is improving, etc. Since the Mordovian village has lagged significantly behind, these innovations are still hard to graft. To defeat this is carried out considerable agitation for the improvement of agriculture — through the release of rural households. leaflets in the Mordovian language, promotion of agricultural exhibitions to the masses, organization of rural households. courses and devices of agronomic lectures. Thus, only at the present time is the question of improving the economy of the Mordovian peasants being raised, and much has already been achieved in this regard. In areas of dense Mordovian settlements, there is no developed industry. Mordovians are exclusively peasants, but they are also engaged in side-trades, which are quite common. The Mordovians do not have workers as an organized mass, but many of them work in production as scattered units — of course, they quickly collapse under such conditions. | In serfdom, the Mordovians were sometimes assigned to work at certain factories — most of all potash. Many Mordovians went to the barge haulers, were engaged in cabbies, etc. Thus, the Mordovians have to be regarded as exclusively 'the peasant mass ;, with quite developed, in places, handicraft and seasonal trades. It must be said that the land relations of the Mordovians do not differ much from those of the Russian peasantry. In everyday life, there are significant remnants of the family life (affecting, for example, in the veneration of the elderly and especially the dead). The historical conditions of the existence of the Mordovians as an oppressed and exploited, downtrodden people for several centuries were reflected in its cultural state. Culturally, the Mordovians lagged behind significantly. Even the literacy of Mordovian men is much lower than that of Russians. In pre-revolutionary times, Mordovians had few opportunities to study. Not to mention the extremely small number of schools in the Mordovian regions, these schools themselves, with compulsory teaching in Russian, were hardly accessible to Mordovians, most of whom did not understand Russian. The enlightenment of the Mordovians began only after the October Revolution. Despite all the difficulties, the number of Mordovian schools has already been increased so much that, for example, in the Penza province. of all school-age children, 48% are enrolled in schools. The population itself is showing a growing desire for education, which became close to them after the revolution thanks to the introduction of teaching in their native (Mordovian) language. Only after the October Revolution did the Mordovians receive a textbook in the Mordovian language — before the revolution, and there were only a few dozen skinny brochures, and even then, devoted to the lives of the saints and church issues. Not only primary, but also secondary, higher education has now become available to Mordovians. Special Mordovian groups are organized at the second level schools, secondary schools are being opened in the Mordovian regions; In addition, there are several Mordovian pedagogical schools, the purpose of which is to prepare teachers for Mordovian schools, since there are very few of them. The Mordovians were also poorly provided with medical assistance in pre-revolutionary times. She needed her most of all, since the conditions of her life caused a wide spread of a number of diseases (trachoma, syphilis, etc.). The elimination of these diseases requires first of all the improvement of the life of the Mordovians, first of all, its economic and cultural condition. Currently, vigorous work is underway to provide Mordovians with medical care. The constant increase in hospitals and medical centers, the organization of special eye and venereal disease teams are already yielding significant results. -In addition, a large cult.-educational work is being carried out along this line, since various "grandmothers", midwives and sorcerers still enjoy significant sympathies of the Mordovians. Together with the clergy, they held the Mordovians in their hands for a long time and are now still fighting for their influence. Much still needs to be done to finally defeat the legacy of the past. The task is facilitated by the fact that the Mordovians themselves begin to feel interested in building their own economy and culture. Until now, significant work has been done to bring the bodies of Soviet power, schools, hospitals and other institutions closer to the mass of the Mordovian population. With the scattered Mordovian population, it could not create an autonomous group. However, the number of Mordovians is significant, and her life and skills are so different from the Russians that it was necessary to create some kind of national-Mordovian administrative units. A way out was found through the organization of Mordovian volosts in those areas where the Mordovian population represents groups concentrated in one locality. At present, a number of such volosts have already been formed. In addition, in part of the district councils and village councils, office work was translated into the Mordovian language, which immediately brought them closer to the Mordovian population. The same is being done with regard to judicial and investigative institutions. In connection with these events, the activity of the Mordovian population in public life has significantly increased. This is reflected in the increase in Mordovians in the composition of Soviet institutions. The number of Mordovians - council members in Penza. lips. almost corresponds to the percentage of the Mordovian and Russian population. The cooperation of the Mordovian population is being carried out, and although the cooperation has not yet reached the same results, as we see in areas with a Russian population, but nevertheless it is possible to note significant successes in this direction, especially in the field of rural households. credit cooperation. All this shows how the social skills of the Mordovians are growing. If earlier only a few brochures were published in the Mordovian language, the content of which has already been mentioned, now there are 4 Mordovian newspapers (in the Erzyan and Mokshan dialects), the content of which is designed for the masses of Mordovian peasants , and in addition, a number of Mordovka textbooks and books are published annually, which highlight the pressing issues of our time and issues of the peasant economy and everyday life. Mordovian youth, studying in universities and other educational institutions, and the Mordovian intelligentsia as a whole are enthusiastically working to raise the cultural level of Mordovians. Mordovian folk art is being collected, there are already excellent collections on ethnography and the life of the Mordovians in a number of museums (Penza, Ulyanovsk, etc.), performances are being carried out in the Mordovian language, etc., etc. All this clearly speaks for that that the Mordovians are on the eve of an economic and national-cultural upsurge, which we already feel now, and that hundreds of years of oppression could not break this people, who had endured a lot on their shoulders and only [now (having the opportunity to walk with quick steps to improve its existence.