1. Country and population
On the northern slopes of the Caucasian ridge and on. The plain adjacent to it is home to many different nationalities, most of which are usually attached to one group of "Caucasian peoples", although they speak languages ​​completely: one unlike the other. In the former Russian Empire, all this diverse population of the North Caucasus was ruled by Russian governors, regional chiefs and Russian officials subordinate to them, and the interests of these "small nationalities", the indigenous population of the region, were almost completely ignored. The dispossessed, dark highlanders responded to the Russian government for such "care" of them with robberies, robberies, and sometimes open attacks on the Russian authorities. The North Caucasus was one of the main fronts of the civil war, since it was this region that the white armies made their base. Now, after the blood and fire of these years, the North Caucasus has finally got the opportunity to build its life on the basis of a healthy national demarcation. Several national regions emerged from the former Terek region, between them the Chechen Autonomous Region, which occupies an area of ​​88,875 sq. versts and stretches from east to west along the mountains, 100 versts, and from north to south, across the Caucasian plain into the depths of the mountains, 140-150 versts. In the south, the Chechen Autonomous Oblast borders on the Georgian SSR, from which it is separated by the snow ridge of the Main Caucasus; in the north, the main border is the Terek River, which separates Chechnya from the steppes of the present Terek Oblast of the Northern Caucasus Territory; in the east, Chechnya borders on the Dagestan Autonomous Republic, in the west, on the Ingush Autonomous Region. This whole family of multi-tribal national republics and regions of the North Caucasus d) occupies, in general, two geographic regions: the foothill plain and the northern slope of the Caucasus Mountains. The foothill plain is primarily a steppe with fertile black earth soil. In the region of Chechnya, this steppe is intersected by several chains of hills, which gives it an undulating character, while near the mountains the area becomes intersected by gullies; in the foothills, the gullies become deeper, passing into narrow and formidable mountain gorges, overgrown, for the most part, with dense forests. Stormy streams rush along the bottom of these gorges, escaping from the snowy peaks of the Caucasus; These streams, breaking out onto the plain, form a whole network of numerous rivers and rivers irrigating the Ciscaucasian steppe.For Chechnya and its closest neighbors, the Terek is the main river, which, leaving the city of Vladikavkaz from the mountain gorges to the plain, flows through it with a powerful stream And takes all the rivers and rivers cutting through the Chechen one ') To them we must also add: Karachaevskaya, Cherkesskaya, Adygeiskaya, North Ossetian, Kabardino-Balkarian Ae-ton. region and Sunzhensky Autonomous Okrug. territory. How many, these mountain rivers have one feature that is very harmful to the surrounding population; they are characterized by sudden, very violent and dangerous floods; strong water rises periodically 3 times a year — in spring, in the midst of summer heat and in autumn; a sudden and violent flood may occur after each downpour swept through the mountains. The surrounding population has to constantly struggle with the destructive power of these floods. Within Chechnya, the foothill steppe is irrigated very unevenly: a very large area of ​​the Alkhanchurt Valley, a long strip stretching from west to east between two chains of hills, is completely devoid of flowing water and at the same time suffers greatly from droughts; on the contrary, the areas near the mountains are also rich in flowing waters, and there is enough rain in the summer. The mountains rise in ledges above the Ciscaucasian steppe: the first ridge is wooded, on the second, higher ridge, forests turn into mountain meadows, why is this second row of mountains is called "Pasture"; behind it rises the “Rocky” ridge, in some places even covered with snow in summer, and, finally, behind it, covered with eternal snow, rise the ridges of the Central Caucasus. These rows of ridges are cut by deep gorges of mountain streams, along which the auls of Mountainous Chechnya are usually located. Thus, the Caucasus Mountains form rows of parallel chains within Chechnya, moreover, in some places these chains are also connected by transverse ridges; as a result, Mountainous Chechnya is one of the most inaccessible areas in the Caucasus; there are few roads in it, and even those that do exist form continuous and sometimes very steep ascents and descents; overcome one ridge, and behind it rises a second, even steeper and higher; after the second, the third, the fourth ...Roads wind over the terrible steepness, all the time they are punched in the form of cornices in the rocks, over the abysses, at the bottom of which mighty streams roar and gurgle menacingly. Very often it is necessary to cross these streams ford, which is far from safe, and when they swell after showers, they completely cut off the message. Dense forests cover the gorges and slopes of the mountains of Chechnya, in which a mass of various animals live: bears, wolves, foxes, deer, and high in the mountains, various breeds of wild goats and chamois. Harsh, wild and beautiful Mountain Chechnya. The climate of the Ciscaucasian plain is very healthy and favorable for agriculture: winters here are very mild, severe frosts are rare, on clear days the sun warms up decently; spring comes very early — violets often bloom in March; the summer is very hot and sunny, and the beautiful "golden" autumn lasts until December. In the mountains, the climate, of course, is much colder, winters are longer and harsher, summers are cooler and rainy. The number of the Chechen people is now about 310,000, or 98.3%! the entire population of the Region. We do not know when and how the Chechens appeared on the northern slopes of the Caucasian Range; their legends tell about this, but the reliability of such oral stories, of course, is very small. First of all, "Chechens" is a Russian name; "Chechen" was called (and is still called) a large aul in the Foothill zone, and the Russian newcomers christened all the people by his name. The Chechens themselves call themselves knakhchio ", which means" people "in their language; this name mainly referred to the Chechens who lived on the plain. Mountain Chechens were called "lamora", that is, "Mountain dwellers". According to all data, in former times Chechens lived almost exclusively in the mountains and only relatively recently, about 150 years ago, began to be resettled on the plane. Isolated in their mountain strongholds, the Chechens have preserved the ancient order of their life to this day; until very recently they had no tribal Organization; not only every aul, but even every house inhabited by close relatives, was an independent whole and could, for example, fight with another house; there was no organized tribal power. The only organization was a sprawling family, a clan that consisted of many separate families, each living in its own sakla, but aware of their common blood ties along the male line; every Chechen is firm! knew and knows many tens (sometimes even hundreds) of his close and distant relatives. Each such vast circle of relatives, a clan, is called "teipa" in Chechen; teip is subdivided into smaller divisions: "tara", "tary" into "neki", "neki" into "cini"; there are more than a hundred of all "teips". In every family, the eldest man (husband, father, grandfather, great-grandfather of the husband) exercises power. To resolve issues concerning (in a certain family, especially if the inhabitants of some aul belong to the same family, a council of old people, representatives of the older generation of this family in the male line, is gathering. Finally, Chechens had meetings of old people representing the older generation of all Chechen families; they ( occasionally took place in 3-4 points, of which the meeting on a mound near the mountain village of Tsentoroy enjoyed particular fame.But all these meetings cannot, strictly speaking, be called an authoritarian organization, since neither the decisions of the meeting of aul old people, assemblies were not binding, they were nothing more than intermediary assemblies, at which "adats" were gradually developed - the common law of the Chechens; these assemblies did not have any signs of state power. and property, since in the case of a murder, the entire rd of the murdered, mainly the nearest relatives, took revenge on the murderer and his family; the relatives of the murdered man killed the murderer. Usually, after this retaliatory murder, negotiations for reconciliation began, which often reached a safe end. But it also happened that a new murder provoked revenge on the part of the family of the first murderer, etc .;both families found themselves in a position of war with each other and mutual murders from blood revenge could continue for decades. This martial law between the two clans ended only with the consent of the offended clan to reconciliation, and the offending clan had to pay a large sum as a ransom for blood; the unit of account was usually a cow. But it was extremely difficult to achieve such consent to reconciliation on the part of the offended, and the reconciled “blood feuds” (ie those in a relationship of blood revenge or “mustugulla” in Chechen) became closer to each other than even their brothers. Thus, murder or an equal insult to the clan threatened (and still threatens) with extremely serious consequences, and the “mustugulla” custom is more formidable and restraining than even our highest measure of social protection. Blood revenge only applies to men; killing a woman is the greatest shame for a Chechen. Thus, the position of each Chechen is determined by the position and size of the clan to which He belongs. The more numerous and richer the genus, the higher the position of each of its members. The position outside the clan is equal to our "outlaw", everyone can kill such a Chechen and not be subjected to any further persecution. The Chechens did not have any class barriers, the whole people was a militant freeman of cattle breeders and, in part, farmers. - "We are all bridles (noblemen)" was a Chechen (proverb. They did not have slaves either. This democratic; feature of their social system Chechens This kind of democracy was in connection with the general anarchic features of their social life, which was based not so much on labor economic activity as on the possibility of obtaining material wealth with weapons. The highest praise of a person among the Chechens was "he is a good warrior." ("They are wild konakhi wu"); "bridle-free as a wolf" ("greyhound-senia"), Any formalized power, any subordination to anyone outside their kind, they hated with all their being: “Our light, who else us in the world "(" duna 'vine, deci! ") was their favorite exclamation at feasts. But the growing numbers forced the Chechens to strive for more fertile places than the harsh mountains, and by the beginning of 19 in. they owned the foothill plain along the banks of the Terek. By the same time, the Russian government decided to include the Caucasus in the Russian Empire and the banks of the Terek began to be covered with Russian fortresses and Cossack settlements. A half-century war of huge Russia began with small mountain peoples, the vanguard of which were the Chechens. This war, by the way; depicted by L. Tolstoy in several stories, especially in his story "Cossacks". By the end of the 50s of the last century, Russian troops wiped out many Chechen auls on the plane and partly in the mountains, while in others they billeted the troops after the Chechens and other highlanders had declared themselves defeated. The population of the devastated auls was relocated to a plane, where all the best lands were already given to the new, Cossack villages. It is easy to imagine what a terrible situation the sons of the mountains, free as the wind, have recently found themselves in. Even the generals Nicholas I were embarrassed; they admitted that the new allotments provided to the Chechens evicted from their homes were very insufficient; they wrote that, faced with the threat of extinction, the Chechens would rise again, since under the current conditions it was impossible for them to live !. And when one of the generals, himself Ossetian by origin, Kundukhov, proposed to conduct agitation among the Chechens for their eviction to Turkey, the other authorities gladly seized on this idea. Kundukhov's agitation was successful and over 22,000 Chechens moved through the Transcaucasia to Turkey. But this case was organized in such a way that after 5-6 years from the total number [More than half of the immigrants died, about 10,000 people survived. Needless to say, this "measure" did not improve the situation of the rest of the Chechen people; it found itself partly again locked in the harsh mountain gorges, partly on a plane, beggarly endowed with the worst lands and surrounded by a solid mass of the dominant Cossack population. Until so recently, Chechens, who did not recognize any power over themselves, had to submit to the Russian administration, which at every step grossly insulted their age-old way of life. The economic situation in which the Russian government had placed the Chechens was truly dire; Here is a typical Chechen fairy tale, vividly reflecting their hopeless need: one day a highlander went to work on his piece of land, hoping to stock up on bread by autumn; worked, worked, finally got tired, spread the cloak, lay down and fell asleep; wakes up — the area he has treated has disappeared; the Chechen jumped up, started running around, looking for the disappeared arable land, but in vain; she seemed to have sunk into the water; The discouraged Chechen sadly went home, picked up a cloak from the ground and ... oh, joy, his arable land was under it. The decades following the conquest of the Chechens, right up to the beginning of the World War, showed that there was very little exaggeration in this tale. The question of the economic situation of the highlanders of the North Caucasus remained a difficult question all this time; the works of many public figures have revealed that in mountainous Chechnya, with the then distribution of land, only 10% of the available population could live; for 90% of Chechens there was no place on earth. On the plane, up to 77% of Chechens had a "hungry" allotment. The deputy from the Terek region AP Maslov said in the State Duma on July 5, 1906: “You cannot imagine how insignificant the land holdings of, for example, Chechens are: x / 10, 1/5, a quarter, a third of a tithe. If you ask how much land he has, he will tell you that there is as much land as fits under his cloak. Land is expensive there. So, for example, a piece of land under a cow costs as much as the cow itself. This situation makes one involuntarily think about how they exist. " Such a speech could only have been dictated by the truly catastrophic state of affairs in the Nagornyi zone of the Northern Caucasus and in Chechnya, in particular. The tsarist government did nothing to alleviate this glaring need; on the contrary, his servants, pacifying the "robbers" of the Chechens, Ingush and others, burned and demolished entire auls, forbade the Chechens to move freely, in a word completed the business of the economic destruction of this little people. For the Chechens, there was only one economic way out of the land need: renting land on the plane from the Cossacks, German colonists, etc., from those who were given the lands taken from the Chechens. For all their ruin, the Chechens were forced to pay up to 400,000 rubles. land 'lease; per man's soul there were annually up to 8 rubles. rental expense. These figures show that the legal exit from want was largely ineffective. It is understandable, therefore, that Chechens often resorted to a way out that was not envisaged by Russian officials — robbery, theft, and robbery. This way out was much more natural for the militant Chechens, since the Russian enslavers did not evoke any feelings for themselves, except for the most acute and irreconcilable hatred. And in the North Caucasus in general, in Chechnya in particular, a number of famous robbers appeared who were real fighters against the autocratic Russian administration, robbers, who sometimes made even representatives of the military government tremble. IN! In the last decade before the World War, the Chechen abrek 'Zelimkhan, who for many years terrorized the North Caucasian administration and deliberately defended the national rights of his oppressed fellow tribesmen, gained all-Russian fame in Russia. The tsarist military and civilian authorities behaved in Chechnya as in a theater! military actions: demanded that the peaceful Chechen population capture and extradite Zelimkhan and, in support of their demands, arrested numerous relatives of the abrek; sent punitive expeditions of all kinds of weapons, which burned entire villages, leaving the unfortunate population in the open. In conclusion, the Chechens were forbidden to settle and lease land on the plane. In parallel with this policy of direct physical strangulation, the tsarist government tried, since the 60s, to artificially create a class of Chechens - large landowners, which would be submissive and loyal to the king, and with help which would be easier to cope with the whole rebellious tribe; but this attempt did not yield serious results. However, as a result of a long and close contact of the natural! Chechen economy with capitalist | the world of Russia, in the Chechen masses there was a certain economic stratification; an insignificant stratum of strong, "kulak" farms emerged, which had significant herds of sheep, or rented relatively large land areas on the plane; these families resorted to the hired labor of farm laborers, who appeared as a result of the same economic differentiation. A layer of small merchants who traded in Chechen wool and Russian chintz also developed; but this stratum had no serious social significance, just like the very poorly developed craft; handicrafts almost never existed in Chechnya. In recent decades, a very small Chechen bourgeoisie has emerged, formed mainly on the basis of the Grozny oil industry; but its isolated representatives of necessity were cut off from the rest of the popular masses, more likely to supplement the cadres of the Russian bourgeoisie. The Chechen intelligentsia, also very small in number, who had gone through Russian schools and universities, often took the disasters of their people to heart and during the years of the revolution and civil war, to a large extent stood on the side of the Soviet regime. In general, the emerging social stratification of the Chechen people did not cause any significant social struggle, it gave way to a sense of national cohesion in the face of the violent tsarist administration and in front of the unity of the hostile mood of the Chechens in relation to the Cossack population. The cultural level of the Chechen people is extremely low; suffice it to say that he did not have his own written language to this day. Before the revolution, there were no Russian public schools in Chechnya either, so the Chechen mass was almost 100% illiterate. There was not a single hospital, and in general there was almost no medical assistance. This is how the small freedom-loving Caucasian people gasped under the heavy foot of the Russian enslavers; immersed in a deep darkness of ignorance, he did not find any other way to fight for his liberation, except for direct revenge on his enemies in the form of robbery and murder.