1. Afghanistan is a country of Afghans
Afghanistan is our neighboring country. The entire northern border of Afghanistan is in contact with the Central Asian republics of our Union. In the west, it borders with Persia, in the south - with English Baluchistan, in the east - with India. It is an inaccessible mountainous country, crossed by the highest mountain ranges of the world, the Hindu Kush and others. Afghanistan, in terms of its area, is larger than France, half the size of Persia and 8 times larger than Belgium. The mountains of Afghanistan, covering four-fifths of the country's surface, are almost devoid of vegetation; only an insignificant part of them is covered with forests, and the sedentary population engaged in agriculture huddle along the river valleys, where proximity to water makes it possible to cultivate the land. The main water basins are the north, the basin of the r. Amu Darya and the southern one are the rivers flowing into the Indus and the basin of the Seistan salt lakes. Afghanistan's climate is as varied as its surface. Depending on the height above sea level, it can be either severe (on high mountains), then moderate (on middle elevations), then sultry-tropical (in lowlands). Summer and winter are abruptly replaced by each other; there is almost no spring or autumn. Modern independent Afghanistan is subdivided into 5 provinces: Kabul, Kandahar, Herat, Turkestan and Badakhshai and 4 districts: Jalalabad, Gerdis, Feraz and Maimene. This, in general, corresponds to the natural dissection of the surface of the country, which splits into 6 regions: low-lying Afghan Turkestan in the north, the Hindu-Kush mountain range, Badakhshan in the northeast, Kabul, the valley of the river of the same name south of Hindu-Kush , Hezaristan, which occupies the central part of Afghanistan, and Seistan in the west with the adjacent deserts from the south. Afghanistan is a poor country. Its natural wealth is insignificant and, moreover, is located in little accessible places, in mountain gorges and at an unattainable height. Steep mountain slopes are unsuitable for agriculture, because they do not retain water, and since four-fifths of the country's surface are mountains, there is very little land suitable for agriculture. These are mainly the Kabul valley, the valley of the Gerirud river (Herat province), Kandahar and Afghan Turkestan. The population of Afghanistan is heterogeneous. In addition to the main population, Afghans, other peoples of Iranian and Turkic origin live here in fairly large numbers. Afghans are an ancient people, mentioned by ancient Greek historians. Their origin is not exactly clear. They themselves consider themselves to be of Semitic origin, the descendants of ten Israelite tribes, who allegedly got there after the expulsion of the Jews from Judea. Their appearance, Semitic profile, black curly hair speaks in favor of this version, but their language testifies against it, which does not reveal traces of the Semitic language, except for the biblical names by which they like to call themselves, and a few other words that could have come into their use. and later. Judging by their language, they are Iranians (closely related to Persians, Tajiks, etc.), who have undergone some changes due to mixing with other races. The Afghans, who have long lived in mountain gorges, where the struggle for existence is very severe, have developed a militant freedom-loving character. Only in the XIII-XVI centuries, when the main population of present-day Afghanistan, the ancient Iranians and Indians, were driven out by the Turkic-Mongol hordes, the Afghans began to descend into the valleys. Here, mixing with the original population, as well as with the Turks and Mongols, they formed that special people, which is now known by the name of the Afghans. They adopted Islam in the 13th century. Afghans number about 2 million, of which R / g million live outside the borders of the present state of Afghanistan, in a strip of independent tribes bordering on English possessions. Thus, in Afghanistan itself, Afghans are a minority. The Afghans speak the Pashto language, but also in cities, and, until recently, in government institutions, Persian predominates, which is also the official language. The second large group of the population (more than a million) are Tajiks. These are the remains of the Iranians who once completely populated the territory of Afghanistan.Under the pressure of the conquerors, they huddled into the most remote inaccessible mountain gorges, like Badakhshan, Hezaristan, partly Afghan Turkestan, where there was nothing attractive for numerous conquerors, and they kept there]! their identity. Until the declaration of Afghanistan's independence in 1919, they were subjected to religious harassment, since in the majority they are Shiite Muslims, that is, different sense than the rest of the population. The official religion of Afghanistan is Sunni Muslims and Tajiks are very hardworking farmers. Driven to the most barren corners of the country, they carefully cultivate their tiny fields, several tens of square meters in size. Their sedentary life and the eternal fear of persecution made them very peace-loving, which makes them sharply different from the warlike Afghans. The next population group of importance is the Turkic group, to which the Uzbeks, Turkmens, Hezarians and aimags belong. This group, to a greater or lesser extent, carries Mongolian blood in its veins. Uzbeks and Turkmens live in Afghan Turkestan, the latter somewhat west and closer to Amu Darya. They differ little from each other in their occupations, lifestyle and religion (Sunnis). These are half-settled nomads, whose nomadic way of life still prevails over the sedentary one. They number about 800,000 people. Hezarians and aimags, or, as they are also called, char-aimaks, live in the central part of Afghanistan, in Herazistan. The former live in the east of this area, and the latter on the western branches of the Hindu-Kush. The Hezarians are predominantly agriculturalists, according to the religion of the Ismaelites (Muslim sect), the aimaks are Sunni Muslim nomads. Information about them is inconsistent, since they represent little-studied nationalities. Together they number about 600,000 people. A special place is occupied by the infidels, a poorly studied people inhabiting the mountain gorges to the north-east of Kabul, an area called Kafiristan (that is, the country of the "infidels"). Now this area has been renamed Nuristan (land of the world). These mountaineers of unknown origin, in their appearance sharply different from the rest of the population of Afghanistan (light skin, hair, eyes), were a constant threat to the sedentary population. They raided trade caravans and peaceful villages. At the end of the last century, an expedition of Afghan troops was sent to Kafiristan, which "with sword and fire" converted the kafirs to Islam. Now infidels are the most "trustworthy" supporters of the Afghan government. In addition, small groups of Indians, Jews, etc. live in cities. In economic terms, Afghanistan is a backward country. The population is mainly engaged in farming and cattle breeding. A small part is occupied by handicrafts. Industry is just spreading. Agriculture in Afghanistan is very primitive. Due to the lack of bearable communication routes, farmers are deprived of the opportunity to sell their products here, so agriculture has the character of a semi-subsistence economy. There are two ways} of treatment - irrigated and non-irrigated. Irrigation zeros, requiring careful maintenance and a whole system of irrigation canals, are found there. where the population finally settled on the earth lives. Non-irrigated fields are cultivated for the most part by semi-nomads who reap the harvest during their stay in this place. Of course, it makes no sense for them to engage in irrigation. They grow wheat, barley, millet, corn, dzhugara, rice and pods. Then tobacco, cotton, opium, hemp, lei. clover and alfalfa. Flax is not used for yarn, but for cattle feed and oil. Gardening and fruit growing are also flourishing. Afghan fruits and vegetables are very famous and they are one of the essential articles of the not extensive Afghan export. A total of 000,000 dessiatines are occupied under the crops, i.e. About 2% of the total area of ​​the country. Cattle breeding also takes a large place in the national economy of Afghanistan, and a very significant part of the population roams with their herds in search of pastures from one place to another, depending on the season. Afghanistan is rich in animals, thanks to its large grassy surface and climate diversity. Cattle, camels, and horses are bred. Of particular importance is the breeding of sheep for meat and skins (karakul). Handicrafts are very developed, and artisans have reached great perfection in the manufacture of carpets, woolen and silk fabrics, iron utensils, fine jewelry from non-ferrous and precious metals and pottery. Carpets and goods made of copper and iron are especially placed. The mining industry is completely undeveloped, although mineral deposits, salt, metals, coal and even oil in the bowels of Afghanistan have been discovered and mined in negligible quantities, and the size of these deposits has not been clarified. Afghans do not have the means to develop this wealth, and they do not want to allow foreigners to do this for fear of losing their independence. The manufacturing industry is in its infancy and is wholly owned by the state. In Kabul there is a woolen factory, a tannery and shoe factories, an arms factory, a soap factory, and a match factory. There is also a power station covering Kabul. All these enterprises are small in size and work mainly for the army. There are no railways in Afghanistan *), and there are very few dirt and highways and they are very inconvenient. The extent to which separate areas are isolated from each other can be judged by the fact that while there is not enough grain in the southern parts of the country, and there is plenty of it in Afghan Turkestan, bread is not delivered to the consuming areas, since transportation is too expensive. Recently *) A narrow-gauge railway was recently built between Kabul and Da-rulaman, the new capital under construction. Since then, automobile communication has been introduced, as well as airplane flights serving communications with foreign countries. Trade, both internal and external, is poorly developed. The entire annual foreign trade turnover does not exceed 30 million rubles. There are few cities. The main ones are: Kabul, the capital (150,000 inhabitants), Kandahar (20,000 inhabitants), Ghazni, south of Kabul, has 15,000 inhabitants, Mazar-i-Sheriff (15 to 20,000 inhabitants) and Herat, which once flourished and numbering 100,000 inhabitants, and now falling into decay (20,000 inhabitants). The social system of Afghanistan retained the features of semi-feudal relations. At the head of the ruling class is the heart. These are government officials from the tribal aristocracy, endowed with large land holdings. In the 19th century, after the penetration of the Russians and the British into Central Asia, part of the capital accumulated by the Serdars began to go into trade. This caused a dismemberment of the heart - some of the Serdars involved in trade form a new class of commercial capitalists, who, however, do not break their ties with the land. This class was the main pillar of the new system in Afghanistan. The clergy, who also owned land plots (church feudalism), adjoins the serdars. The clergy, who lost all their advantages under the new system, are sharply, reactionary and hostile to the young padishah and his reforms. The peasantry, together with the pastoralists making up 80% of the population, is exploited by landowners and clergy and government officials. Finally, the small urban bourgeoisie: small traders, artisans and handicraftsmen are entirely on the side of reforms and the new system. The geographical position of Afghanistan, nicknamed by British politicians "the gateway of India", has determined its political history. Indeed, possessing the only passages leading from India to Russia, to Persia and to China, Afghanistan has long attracted the attention of British and tsarist imperialism, seeking to possess the "keys to the gates of India." Throughout the nineteenth century and early twentieth century, this struggle for influence in Afghanistan was fought with varying happiness between England and Russia and through military force and diplomatic negotiations. During this struggle, between the two predators, mainly under Abdur-Rahman (1880- 1901), Afghanistan, under the influence of a formidable danger, from a weak non-centralized state, consisting of a number of semi-independent regions, turned into a single despotic monarchy, annexing a number of rebellious outskirts to the main possessions. England, taking advantage of Russia's difficulties in other regions, is gradually expanding its influence in Afghanistan, and in 1907 England and Russia conclude a treaty (convention) according to which Russia, for concessions made to it in Persia and Turkey, "recognizes Afghanistan outside the sphere of Russian influence." and undertakes to communicate with Afghanistan only through the mediation of the British Government, while England declares that she is not going to change the political situation in Afghanistan. Thus, Afghanistan has retained the appearance of an independent state. From that moment on, the British finally consolidated their influence in Afghanistan, which was actually established under Abdur-Rahman. Relying on the weak-willed emir Habibullah Khan, who replaced his enterprising father Abdur-Rahman, the British became the masters of the country, and the emir, who received an English subsidy, actually became the executor of the will of England. Afghanistan, probably, would have become a colony of England if not for the world war, which, as is known, disrupted many plans of imperialism, although it was waged precisely in the interests of this latter. During the World War, a German-Turkish mission was admitted to Afghanistan, which conducted propaganda among government circles against the British for the unification of Muslim states. Khabibullah Khan demanded a German or Turkish corps in case of a move against the British in India. He played a double game with the German-Turkish mission, but ultimately he failed to use the predicament for the British in order to liberate his country. He continued his carefree harem life as before, leaving all the government of the country to a clique of court careerists and governors. The people were extremely dissatisfied with the rule of Khabibullah. For his obedience to the British, he was nicknamed the "English lackey" (nuker); In the advanced circles of the Afghan merchants and officials, a group of nationalists was born from among young people who had traveled abroad, which began to agitate for the independence of Afghanistan. In 1911, the journal Seraj-ul-Akbar was founded. A small group of Afghan nationalists, mln and pre-Afghans, to whom also belonged the third son of Khabibullah, Amanullah-hai, the current emir of Afghanistan, prepared a palace coup. In 1919, in the spring of Khabibullah was killed on the hunt and Amanullah Khan entered the throne, contrary to the laws on succession to the throne. He enjoyed the support of a group of nationalist-minded officials, merchants and the army, which expressed popular indignation against the emir and Serdars, who had sold themselves to the British. Here, of course, our October Revolution was important, which also influenced this backward country. The coup, in the same year, caused a declaration of war from the outside Fig. 1. Street of Kabul, England. As a result of this war, although it ended in the defeat of the Afghans, a treaty was concluded between Britain and Afghanistan, and in which the emir refused the subsidy, but England was deprived of the right to interfere in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and control its foreign policy. Thus, Afghanistan became an independent state. Our October Revolution contributed to this not only in the sense that it prepared the minds of the leaders of this Eastern despotism, but also in that. the fact that Soviet Russia, having proclaimed the self-determination of peoples, erased all imperialist tendencies in the history of Russia, and ceased to be dangerous for neighboring countries. That this is exactly the case and that it was taken into account by the Afghans can be judged by the fact that the young emir Amanullah Khan immediately after accession to the throne turned to the chairman of the Council of People's Commissars, Comrade. Lenin, with a telegram of welcome, in which he invited the Soviet government to enter into normal diplomatic relations with Afghanistan. Soviet Russia was the first to recognize the independence of Afghanistan, “even before the conclusion of the Anglo-Afghan treaty, and this was of great moral importance for the young Afghan state in its struggle for national independence. The reforms undertaken by the young emir and vigorously pursued by him upon accession to the throne were aimed at destroying the feudal system and clearing the way for commercial capital, a new force in the state on which modern Afghanistan relies. The blow on the feudal was strictly carried out by the emir, the abolition of slavery, the abolition of the "bekar" - compulsory free labor service of the population, a kind of corvee, the replacement of the tax in kind with a uniform monetary tax, the confiscation of the vakuf (church) lands and the deprivation of subsidies to the nobility. The following reforms served to revive trade and facilitate trade turnover: 1) the abolition of numerous internal customs offices, through which transported goods had to pass, and the introduction of a single customs tariff, in which the duty is levied once, instead of the previous 12-14 fees; 2) the centralization of state power and 3) the proclamation of bourgeois freedoms, such as: equality of nationalities, freedom of personality, religion, inviolability of property, home and correspondence, and even freedom of the press. True, not all of these freedoms, especially the last three, are realized in practice, but their proclamation alone characterizes the course of reforms taken. A number of activities are also aimed at raising the culture of the people. Secular schools have been opened, in which the exact and social sciences are taught. Foreign teachers and instructors have been invited. The reforms related to the emancipation of women will be discussed below, in the chapter on the Afghan woman after the reforms.
