I. Modern Turkey
a) Territory, population, main occupation of residents
The Republic of Turkey occupies a small part of the territory in Europe, namely the southern tip of the Balkan Peninsula, the so-called. Thrace, and located on the peninsula of Asia Minor - Anatolia. Anatolia is also adjoined by those that are part of Turkey: from the southwest - Cilicia, from the east - Turkish Armenia and the southeast - Kurdistan. Thus, Turkey borders on the Transcaucasian Republics and is separated by the Black Sea from Crimea and southern Ukraine. On the 'Balkan Peninsula, Turkey borders on Bulgaria and Greece. In M, Asia: in the south, with Syria and Iraq (Arab states, the first under the French mandate, the second under the English, almost colonies), and in the east, Turkey, except for the Transcaucasian Republics, borders with Persia. The population of Turkey, in the absence of accurate statistics, it is determined, approximately, from 9 to 1 million people. The main mass is made up of Turks - from 7 to 9 million, then Kurds - about half a million, migrants from the Caucasus (Circassians, Chechens, Lezgins, etc.) - 300 thousand Turkmens - 400 thousand, followed by small ethnic groups , which, like the above, are national minorities: Arabs, Ansars, Lazes, Greeks, Armenians, Jews, Gypsies, Bulgarians, etc. The life and economic situation of the peoples inhabiting Turkey are very diverse and in many respects differ from the life of the Turks themselves. However, the real work has in mind exclusively a Turkish woman. Turkey occupies a huge space - but not all of the land is suitable for human life. The surface of Turkey is very diverse. Its European part - Thrace - is crossed by a low mountain ridge running parallel to the Black Sea coast. The population here is engaged in agriculture, tobacco growing, and other trades. A significant part of Anatolia is occupied by mountains and plateaus. The most suitable for life is the coastal strip of the Black, Aegean and Mediterranean seas. Due to the characteristic location of the mountains, the paths built here by foreigners go to the west-east. direction. The country thus forms a natural bridge between the Balkan Peninsula and Asia and has served as an arena for trade and military activities of various peoples since ancient times. The coastal strip, by nature, has much more in common with southern Europe than with Asia. The inner part of the country, on the contrary, on the surface, the climate can be ranked among the western extremities of the mountain and steppe areas of Central Asia. This area, with a large number of lakes, is the most barren part of the central plateau, cut by rivers heading north-west. The inhabitants of this part are engaged in cattle breeding and agriculture. With the exception of the described central region, Anatolia is a fertile area. The western and southern parts are especially rich, where horticulture, silkworm breeding and tobacco growing are flourishing. The main occupation of the Turkish population is agriculture, cattle breeding and tobacco growing. The industry is poorly developed, there are few large cities. An ordinary Turkish city, in Anatolia, has a very colorful appearance; narrow, winding streets lined with flat houses decorated with galleries and balconies. Craftsmen always sit in front of the house with their worker! device. The city center is a market square, always busy with carts, carts, donkeys. Bazaars usually take place on holidays. Everything is sold at the bazaar: millet, sheep's cheese, etc. In the motley hustle and bustle, the tents of nomads who have wandered to the city flicker, and the city is filled with the roar of donkeys and the songs of blind zurnacs. Children are scurrying right there. They carefully collect fresh manure and put it in specially prepared bags. Wood in central Anatolia is expensive and hard to come by, and dried manure is a good fuel. Every town has coffee shops and saunas. The former serve as a traditional resting place for men. Here, in the shade, they often sleep with their heads always resting on the saddle. Baths - entertainment for women; here they spend the whole day, here they drink, eat and gossip with friends. Most cities abound in water and greenery. As a rule, sharp peaks of mosque minarets rise above each city. The Turkish village has a very poor appearance, although the inside of the houses is kept as clean as it is | the poverty of the owners allows. Usually in the middle of the village rises the house of a bey (rich man), which is adjacent to low clay houses and dugouts. Gardens and fields surround the villages. The cultivation of the land for most of the peasants in Anatolia is extremely primitive: they plow the land with a wooden plow, which is harnessed to bulls. The Turkish peasant is very hardy and loving. When the roads are in BAD CONDITION, he has to expend extraordinary efforts to sell his products and exchange them for urban manufactures. On all roads one can see narrow carts drawn by oxen or bulls, the so-called carts; next to them, clumsy carts, set on one axle, with two round scraps of wood weave with a creak and noise. 1. Field work in Anatolia instead of wheels. Long caravans are visible on the other side. In charge of! caravan is a donkey. Sits on his back. "Katyrdzhi" - the leader of the caravan The donkey, the chain, is followed by the camels with their load. the latter has several bells on the neck: their uniform tinkling shows the guide that all animals are walking calmly and in order. Travelers often ride camels. From time to time someone drags on a folk song, others echo him ... Lately, the camel and the caravan are beginning to replace the car and the train of the railway, but it will take a long time for Turkey to have a sufficient railway network! M. Asia (Anatolia) still has the blood of their ancestors - the nomadic Turks who migrated here in the 13th century. from Central Asia; but the appearance of the modern Turk, under the influence of mixing with the indigenous population, has changed a lot. However, along with this, the spiritual characteristics of the race did not disappear; the endurance, calm courage and unpretentiousness of the shepherd people did not disappear either. The centuries-old sultan's period, of course, did not improve the situation of the struggle. All the sultan's institutions did not correspond to the spirit of the people, did not meet their needs, as did the entire regime of the sultan. Despite its natural resources, Turkey remained a poor agricultural country, constantly ravaged by wars in which defeat Due to its favorable geographical position, Turkey has always been a bone of contention between the strongest European states, each of which wanted to have the Straits of Constantinople in their hands. As a result of these objective historical conditions, which affected the entire economic structure of Turkey, it was not able to develop economically into a large industrial nation state. Western capitalism used Turkey as a market for selling its goods. Suppressing the development of national industry here, European capital contributed, thereby, to the preservation of the feudal-patriarchal system here, and together with it, it contributed to the preservation of the most disenfranchised position of Turkish women. Only when industrial capital appears to replace commercial capital and Eastern despotism, when the national Turkish intelligentsia and the bourgeoisie achieve, through the revolution of 1908, the constitutional transformation of the state, then does the women's movement begin to develop here. It was purely intellectual and populist. It sought partial freedoms for women: the right to education, family emancipation and the removal of the veil from the face.
b) National liberation struggle. Defeat of the Turkish Ottoman Empire in the World War 1914-1918. meant the death of her | as an independent state, the actual division of vast territories between the victors: England, France and Italy. The Turkish sultan, in order to maintain at least a shadow of his power, made all concessions to the winners and signed with them, in the city of Sevres, in 1920 an onerous peace treaty. But the calculation was made without the real master of the country, without the laboring masses of Turkey, devastated, impoverished, but still showing strength and perseverance in the struggle for self-preservation. While the British, French, Italian occupying troops went deep into the best the regions of Turkey, its capital Constantinople and the straits were captured by the enemy, the Greek army dyed the waters of the Smyrna port with Turkish blood, occupied the large city of Asian Turkey, Smyrna, and invaded the interior of the country, consuming the Turkish villages and cities to fire and sword. continuous advance into the country, it was difficult to determine the limits of the despair of the Turkish people. And now, the tired, naked people rose up. He rebelled without leaders and at first without any plan of the Turk. In many places, organizations began to be created for the armed defense of their rights. These detachments attack the occupiers, upsetting their rear, raising uprisings, destroying communications and food. By the beginning of 1919, all the peasantry had risen, led by demobilized soldiers. Such a spontaneous upsurge is explained not only by the moments of military-political oppression, but also by the economic need of the peasantry to liberate the coastal strip occupied by the enemy and, mainly, ports, for the implementation and production of the internal exchange of grain and raw materials accumulated during the years of the world war and the blockade. The action of the peasant masses turns into a broad national movement with the addition of the urban bourgeoisie, which has grown greatly during the war years, the intelligentsia, and, finally, military elements led by Kemal Pasha, the leader of the national movement, now the President of the Republic of Turkey. By the will of the population, the first national assembly was convened in the city of Erz-room, at which it was decided to defend their rights. From that moment on, the liberation and revolutionary struggle of the Turkish people for its existence took the form of a war, which had to be waged by the people's government of the Great National Assembly formed in Angora against Western imperialism. Subsequently, at the congresses in Sivas, and then in Angora, On April 23, 1920, this decision was repeated and confirmed. Final British occupation Constantinople in March 1920, the dispersal of the Turkish parliament helps to formalize the state building of the new Turkey and make it the natural center of Angora, located, unlike Constantinople, in the center of Anatolia. Of course, for the Sultan of Anatolia (Asian Turkey) was a country of treason, ... rebelled against the padishah (sultan). The Sultan's court sentenced Mustafa Kemal and other major leaders of the national movement to death in absentia. The spontaneous submission of the masses, which initially took the form of a partisan war, was used by the leaders of the struggle to create a staunch people's army. After 4 years of heroic struggle, this army won decisive victories over Greece, Dashnak Armenia and France (in Cilicia). And when it seized the country in a revolutionary manner and approached Constantinople, on a dark autumn night in 1922, the last fled from the Ildiz palace to the English dreadnought Sultan of Turkey Memed VI, deposed by the Grand National Assembly of Turkey for treason and betrayal of the nation on 1 / X 1922. And finally, on March 3, 1924, by the decision of the same VNST, the last caliph (spiritual head of all Muslims) Abdul Majid was deposed, and on March 5 he left Turkey forever, taking with him all the memories of the former power and power of the Ottoman sultans and caliphs. The caliphs used their religious authority to promote the ideas of militant pan-Islamism among Muslims around the world. They have always been the center uniting all the reactionary elements of Islam (the clergy, the pan-Islamic (bourgeoisie, etc.). They contributed to the involvement of the countries of the East in the orbit of imperialism. After the World War, the Turkish caliphs openly sided with the imperialists and all contributed to their policy of enslaving Turkey and the defeat of the national revolutionary movement of its people. Naturally, the victorious people tried to get rid of them. There is no doubt that the example of the struggle of Soviet Russia against the intervention of Western imperialism had a tremendous impact on the development of the national liberation movement. The Soviet government was the first to recognize the new Turkish government. the state and entered into a close community with it in May 1920. Friendly relations were secured by a number of agreements on friendship and brotherhood of peoples. {By 1923, young Turkey successfully ended the war for its liberation. At an international conference in Lausanne, she concluded a victorious peace with the imperialists (24 / UP 1923), having invaded their territory and created political, eco-Unomic and legal conditions for their self-sustained existence. The leaders of the national movement are striving to create a bourgeois-democratic state in Turkey. The republican form of government was established on October 29, 1923, the current constitution was adopted by the VNST on April 20, 1924.

2. The life of a Turkish woman
a) Old life
The life of the Turks has developed under the strong influence of their religion - Islam. Most of the country's rulers drew all their worldly wisdom from the Koran (the holy book of Muslims). The Koran is a system of property and family law that meets the relationships based on private property that existed in the economy, trade and life of the peoples who inhabited Arabia during the era of the founder of Islam (VII century). And now the Turkish sultans, encouraged by the clergy, saw in the Koran, which is perfect in its spirit and according to its standards! did not correspond to the economic state of Turkey in the 19th and 20th centuries, the source of wisdom and all knowledge. All legislation was based on the Koran; in old schools only the Koran was studied. Thanks to this situation, the Turks did not develop, but artificially decreased their interest in learning, and only the lucky ones who got into foreign educational institutions or went abroad got rid of such a system of education. According to Sharia and adat, i.e. according to religious and customary law, which most of all reflect the economic backwardness of the East, they are used to looking at a woman as a lower being, as a thing. This view was especially instilled in the clergy, who were the most reactionary elements in the country. Usually, at the age of 9-15, a girl was married, or rather, sold for kalym (ransom), and since then! she had to walk with a closed face, since, according to the established centuries-old custom, a woman was among the Turks, like among most peoples of the East, a real hermit. Obliged to serve only the man to whom she became a wife or concubine, a Turkish woman did not dare to appear to another man, did not dare to look up at him. Islam allows the faithful to have 4 wives, but besides these, you can have an unlimited number of slave concubines. However, polygamy (polygamy) has always existed only among the upper class: the Pasha, the clergy and the rich bourgeoisie. The Pasha dignitary was officially considered a monogamist, but he had unofficial wives - "odalyk". As soon as the "odalyk" gives birth to a child, she, according to the Sharia, becomes a wife, and thus the Pasha from a monogamous turned into a polygamist. To contain a large number of "odalyk" and wives were available only to the rich therefore, there were several dozen large harems throughout Turkey. The largest was the harem of the Sultan, numbering more than a thousand women. The working population, of course, could not afford such a "luxury" of polygamy, for purely economic reasons. Polygamy among the peasants was found only where the handicraft of women was; such as: the manufacture of carpets, fabrics, sericulture, all kinds of weaving - occupied a prominent place. In manual labor, each extra hand brings material benefits, and each handicraftsman acquired two or three wives in order to have free workers. With the decline of handicraft production, this group also experienced a transition to monogamy. The intelligentsia did not have polygamy, and it was a champion of women's equality. This is mainly due to the economic situation of the Turkish intelligentsia, which literally eked out a semi-proletarian existence. Usually a Turkish house - simple, with high windows - is divided into two halves: a male - "selamlik" and a female - "haremlik", which may include of the men, only one husband. Here, among the low divans, set along the walls, hung with carpets, among pillows, tables and trinkets, a Turkish woman from the wealthy class spent her life. A peasant woman huddles in a smoky hut or dugout, next to livestock, works from morning till night on her farm, but she also has her own harem behind the board partition, where a stranger is also forbidden to enter. The inhabitants of Turkish rich harems belonged to the most diverse nations. In addition to Turkish women, there were Arabian, Circassian, Armenian, Persian, Tatar, French and other women. The Turkish woman went to the harem by marriage, the rest were sold by their parents, relatives or traders in human goods. The destruction of slavery gave rise to a special kind of entrepreneurs who bought up girls for Turkey at East and Russia. Especially) the purchase of women in lean years was successful. In the southern provinces of Russia, there were constant agents for the recruitment of harem goods and a rate was set on it, changing "depending on beauty and age. Thus, European women also fell into the harems. The usual home costume of a Turkish woman in Anatolia is wide, bright colors, shalwar, shoes , on top of a salwar, a long dress with slits on the sides, intercepted by a colored belt. But for a long time, under the influence of Western fashion, this costume from a city woman was supplanted by a European one. The guardians of women's morals only managed to keep the “feridge” - a dark cloak and an impenetrable veil “jasper ", Without which women, until the very last years, could not show themselves outside the house, and even now, in more remote areas, they do not risk going out. True, under the influence of fashion, the deaf baggy" feridge "has long turned into a light raincoat, and impenetrable "yashmak" - in a transparent veil through which you can see the facial features, but even in this form, this costume has already outlived itself. started to reform women's dress. Legislative acts of local city governments prohibit wearing veils, and in some vilayets (provinces) even decrees have been issued to replace, at a certain time, the traditional shalwar with a skirt. Until very recently, until 1925, the harem existed not only in the house Turk — he was in every public place: at the train station, in the train and tram carriages, at the dock of the steamer — everywhere there were special sections for women, where men were not allowed.

b) Childhood
The birth of a child is, along with marriage, the main celebration of the Turkish family. The birth of a child is accompanied by ancient rituals inherited from nomadic ancestors. As soon as the neighbors learn about the birth, they rush to look at the newborn, who has already been prepared for this visit: they cover him with good cloth, put an amulet with a saying from the Koran around his neck and tie a piece of garlic , The amulet and garlic should protect the baby from the envious eye. In order to drive away the genie from the child (the devil, which, according to legend, always turns in a newborn's room), a stick with a tied onion is placed in the corner of the room. 2. Turkish peasant family near their dugout house All those who bring congratulations are invited to the feast. However, it should be noted that only the birth of a boy is celebrated, while the birth of a girl goes unnoticed. In Turkey, as in the East in general, it is not customary to inquire about the number of female children. If a Turk says that he has four children, then he has four sons.1 72 Turkish woman. A Turkish woman breastfeeds herself - this is the custom and command of the Koran; only illness can force a mother to take a wet nurse. Then many of the rights of mothers are transferred to the latter; dairy relationship among the Turks is revered no less blood. Girls spend in the "haremlik" (harem) all their lives until marriage, boys - up to seven years. Needless to say, how much the harem spoils children. Rough morals, gossip, squabbles and fights — the usual companions of a harem — early reveal the inside out of life in front of a child. Father rarely pays attention raising children; Boys, due to the fact that they leave the harem early, gain life experience, but the girls vegetate to the end in stuffy dungeons, fenced off from the world, and leave them only to get into a new cage - into the harem of their husband. In terms of education, girls were also in a worse position. They were almost never sent to schools, and most women in provincial cities, as well as peasant women, were illiterate. Usually matchmaking took place, and even now in many places it happens, in the following order: in a house where there is an adult girl, a matchmaker or a young man's mother comes to look at the bride. The guest showers the bride with compliments and goes to the next houses to look at other brides. The next day she returns to the one on which her choice stopped, with a formal offer and a promise of a certain amount, in the form of a dowry. Because of. the dowry is intensified negotiations; everyone's goal is to have a brilliant wedding. Often, the family goes into debt to buy things the bride needs at weddings — to hire musicians and other expenses. But then everyone proudly recalls the magnificent wedding. And the girl gets to the person often not only alien to her, but quarrelsome and cruel. She must obediently satisfy his slightest whims, entangled in chains of religious laws, eternally intimidated by the reactionary clergy, and, most importantly, economically dependent on her husband. True, this dependence is incomplete and the Muslim woman still enjoyed, according to religious laws, certain rights to the separate use of family property; but the husband always had sufficient means and opportunities to keep his wife in the position of a subordinate, and not an equal member of the family.
c) Wedding, divorce
A wedding for a Turkish woman, not only a bride, but also a neighbor, a relative and a friend is a joy and great fun. On wedding days, women forget their monotonous work life and freely and sincerely indulge in fun. The motley ethnographic composition of the population of Turkey, the variety of living conditions of the Turks ( from nomadism to sedentary) - all this leaves an abundance of imprints on the wedding: rituals are preserved in the wedding, in which the most ancient forms of marriage, the pre-Muslim way of life are allegorically recalled - "abduction", "purchase and sale", although among the nomads of Turkey, " yuryukov ”, these customs have survived to this day. Traces of the forced abduction of girls are scattered throughout the wedding ceremony. The bride's side seems to know that a kidnapping is being prepared: on the day the bride moves to the groom's house, she is carefully guarded; the younger brother locks the room where the bride is sitting, and only for money does he open the door. Marriage is preceded, as indicated, by matchmaking, and after it is the ceremony of concluding a marriage contract, which takes place in the bride's house. Two specially selected witnesses ask the bride about her voluntary consent to the marriage. After that, the parties begin negotiations on the ransom, the bargaining ends in prayer, and the religious marriage is concluded. Then the groom's father starts a conversation with the bride's father about the time of the wedding. Before the appointed day, the “hena rite” takes place in the bride's house. 20-30 girls gather, and the elderly come. The bride's hair is loosened and combed, the hyena is bred in a cup, and to the accompaniment of songs, the hyuna's hair is dyed first for the bride, and then all the girls present. At this time, the bride's relatives cry. At the end of the ceremony, everyone present is having fun. Next comes the transfer of the groom's dowry to the bride's house. In the groom's house at this time everything is being prepared for the wedding. Musicians are invited to the wedding; wedding celebrations, which take place according to the established order, often drag on for a whole week. On Monday, the dowry is examined at the bride's house. On Tuesday, the priesthoods shout in the surrounding villages and even in the neighboring town that a wedding is taking place in such and such a village, and everyone is invited to the races with prizes. On Wednesday races are organized, in which the surrounding residents also take part. Runners, as a rule, take off their clothes and remain in their underwear. And in this form they walk an hour's walk from the village, from where the run begins. The winners receive prizes and gifts. The rest of the day, guests spend in contemplation of the "bacha" dances, which are interspersed with the performance of magicians. On the same day, clothes specially made for the groom are solemnly transferred from the bride's house to the groom. On Thursday, there is a fight of "pahlavans" (wrestlers). By the way, we note that in cities they do without struggle. The surrounding residents are also notified about the fight in advance. Pahlavans are being prepared in two weeks. On the day of the duel, again people, music. The fight begins with the youngest and gradually it comes to the "celebrities". Three winners receive prizes: a buffalo, a bull and a ram. At 10 o'clock, a procession, consisting of a muhtar, elders and always schoolchildren, approaches the bride's house. A white scarf is thrown over the bride, put on a horse and after parting with her parents, during which the bride is obliged to cry, a procession with bodies Egami, loaded with the bride's things, goes to the groom's house. Some boy from the groom's relatives is chosen as a "friend", he relentlessly walks with the groom. On the eve of the wedding night, the "friend" is rolled on the bed so that the young have a boy, and when the groom enters the bride's room, the "friend" is already there. Boiled chicken is brought here; the groom pulls one leg, the friend pulls the other. As soon as the “friend” rips off his leg, he immediately gets up and leaves. Near the room where the young people sleep, the groom’s relatives are on duty all night — in case the enemies want to harm the groom in any way, which can be expected from a rival. A few days later, the young go to the guests, starting with the father-in-law, and receive guests. The divorce among the Turks, until the new civil code of 1926, was not framed with any formalities and depended solely on the wishes of the husband. from me, ”or—“ I look at you as my sister’s back, ”so that an essential part of the divorce is over. The wife was considered released and had to return to her parents. Only the obligation to pay the divorced wife "mekr" (our alimony), the monthly amount for the maintenance of the children, if they were not left with the father, was a little restraining for the husband. In addition, the husband is obliged to return part of the dowry to his wife.