1. China national revolutionary movement
China, covering an area of ​​11 thousand square meters. klm., with its colossal population of 440 million people and its wealth, for a long time attracted the attention of the European states of the sailors of Europe in the XVI century. aspired to penetrate into this fabulous country, about which they walked the same way as about India, tempting and fantastic legends dedicated to its innumerable treasures. In this and later eras, silk and tea were the main commodities of trade between China and Europe, while traces of a high and very ancient culture have been preserved in China. But the Chinese vigilantly protected themselves from the penetration of foreigners, and everything that was done behind the Great Wall of China remained unknown to Europeans. However, in the middle of the last century, the development of capitalist machine production in European countries, which presented more and more broad demands in the field of markets and raw materials, became an incentive for an increase in the activity of European states in their penetration into China. China with its huge population was a very tasty morsel as a sales market for industrial products of capitalist countries; the possibility of the development of industrial crops' and the extraction of minerals made it attractive as a reservoir of raw materials needed by this same industry. Industrial crops include: tea cultivated in the regions of South and Central China (the annual export of Chinese tea now amounts to about 80 million rubles), silkworm growing, also developed in these regions and on the Shandong Peninsula, cotton growing, mainly in the basin of the river. Yang Tzu; in cotton production, China ranks third in the world, after the United States and India. Of the minerals, one must name: iron, coal, copper, antimony, mercury, precious metals, etc. Finally, China is extremely important as an object for the import of foreign capital invested in transport, banks, industry, etc. Since the first half of the last century, the imperialist powers have been striving to assert their political influence in China, which could provide them with economic benefits. England was the first power to achieve significant privileges in China; The Nanking Treaty, which marked the beginning of English rule in China, was the first in the chain of the so-called. Unequal treaties that still weigh heavily on the body of the Chinese people. Following this, an increase in activity on the part of France in the area bordering on her possessions in Indo-China and Germany, which "leased" territory on the Shandung Peninsula, is noticed. Finally, the first years of this century were marked by an aggravation of rivalry between Japan and tsarist Russia due to the predominance in Northern and Southern Manchuria, which resulted in the war of 1904, which ended, as you know, with the defeat of Russia and the consolidation of Japanese influence in northern China. In the era preceding the world war of 1914-18. British and Japanese diplomacy in China acted in contact, and in the Russo-Japanese war, Japan relied on British support. Later, the United States penetrated here. Seeing that the best positions have already been taken here, American diplomacy puts forward the so-called. "The principle of open doors", that is, seeks to provide American capital with conditions equal to those of other powers. The late American imperialism acts very cautiously at first, using soft methods of penetration, as opposed to the brutal violence and arbitrariness of the British and Japanese. This explains the sympathy of the Chinese intelligentsia for America, sympathy that is now evaporating, for American imperialism is no longer playing at complacency and meekness. The imperialist powers, despite mutual contradictions, acted as a united front in those cases when it was necessary to achieve new privileges for foreigners and new restrictions on China's independence. The basis of foreign rule in China is a system of unequal treaties, which provides foreign capital with enormous advantages over the native one. Thanks to "unequal treaties" they received the right to set up in ports open for foreign trade, isolated foreign quarters (settlements), control over Chinese customs, the proceeds from which went to pay foreign loans, the right of consular jurisdiction, that is, jurisdiction of foreign subjects to consular courts, and not to Chinese courts, etc. Thus, the foreigners became the actual masters of China, imperiously dictating their will to it under the reliable cover of gunboats and airborne troops. Under these favorable conditions, foreign capital was pouring into China, which was covered with a dense network of British, Japanese, American, and other industrial enterprises. Foreign goods, taking advantage of their privileged position, flooded the country, delaying the development of local industry. By the beginning of this century, China was an economically and (technically backward agricultural country, dominated by feudal relations and I. Even today, the vast majority of the population is engaged in agriculture, and about 75% of the entire peasantry has little land and in the majority is forced to rent land from large landowners (constituting only 11% of the agricultural population, and the dominant form of rent is rent in kind. into many economically completely isolated regions, China was the arena of permanent struggle between individual governor-generals (dujuns). The peasantry, burdened with exorbitant taxes and high rents, being in a completely powerless state, forced to sell their products to foreign merchants at low prices, followed the path To this must be added the incredible arbitrariness and bribery of officials who were (uncontrolled and autocratic masters in their districts. On the throne of the Chinese Empire was the Manchurian dynasty, descended from the Manchur tribe, who once conquered China, based on the reactionary bureaucracy and the military. All these conditions paved the way for fermentation and discontent among the broad masses, especially the peasantry, which initially turned into a spontaneous form of riots and the formation of bandit gangs. The introduction of foreign capital into China was accompanied by the destruction of feudal economic forms and the process of a certain industrialization of China. Already at the end of the last century, there was an increase in the manufacturing industry in China, mainly in textiles and silk. Later, especially in the era of World War II, the industrialization of China is making great strides. The mining industry is developing (mining of coal, ore, etc.), metallurgy, machine-building, in particular, shipbuilding, etc.). As a result of the changes that have taken place, the indigenous bourgeoisie appears on the scene, which very soon became a serious competitor to foreign capital in China. In the era of world war, Chinese capital still | more inflows into industry and is gaining a prominent place in a whole range of industries. It is quite understandable that the usual methods of imperialism and the conditions created by foreign diplomacy in China were a very serious obstacle to the development of the Chinese bourgeoisie, which naturally in the majority takes a position, hostile to foreign domination and internal Chinese reaction. At the same time, the process of China's industrialization gives rise to a large industrial Chinese proletariat, currently reaching more than 21/2 million people, quickly realizing its task of combating imperialism, which hinders the process of normal economic and social development of the country through the predatory seizure of concessions, enslavement China's loans, control over customs, etc. The incredibly difficult working conditions of the Chinese worker, which we will discuss below, make the class struggle in China especially acute. Thus, the ground is created for a united national revolutionary movement. on- ; from the local Chinese reactionary forces which were directed against world imperialism and against its agents. The first outbursts of dissatisfaction brewing among the masses were: the Taiping uprising in the middle of the last century and the boxing uprising in 1898-1901. The latter took on extremely formidable forms; its immediate reasons were: the defeat of China in the war with Japan, accompanied by a large indemnity, a number of concessions granted to tsarist Russia, etc. The government, frightened by the anti-dynastic nature of this movement, tried to divert the people's anger from itself and direct it against foreigners. The rebels moved to Beijing, where an anti-foreign movement also broke out and the foreman of the diplomatic corps, the German ambassador, was killed in the street by a devastated crowd. The united forces of all the capitalist powers Soon defeated the rebels, took Beijing and, of course, crowned their success with a bloody massacre, very characteristic of the constant tactics carried out in China, by "enlightened seafarers." The result of this expedition was the famous protocol of 1901, which significantly expanded the privileges of foreigners in China, introduced the extraterritoriality (extra-land) of the embassy quarter and finally consolidated foreign domination in the country. The next stage of the Chinese liberation movement dates back to 1910-11. This movement was more organized and wider than previous outbreaks, reflecting the pressing demands of the majority of the nation. The growing bourgeoisie, the peasantry, and the Chinese intelligentsia united in their hatred of foreign rule and the Manchu monarchy. The movement began with a campaign to buy the railways from foreigners, which are a powerful weapon of imperialism, and resulted in an uprising that engulfed the most important regions of Central China. Revolutionary propaganda met with warm sympathy not only among the broad masses within the country, but also among the numerous Chinese emigrants in other countries, in particular in the United States. Under the onslaught of this revolution, the centuries-old Manchurian a monarchy so hated by the Chinese masses, and China was declared a republic. The movement was led by Dr. Sun-Yat-Sen (Sun-Wen), who was initially elected as the interim president of the republic. Sun-Yat-Sen, whose name is now widely known far beyond the borders of China, along with the great leaders of the struggle for the liberation of the oppressed all over the world, and the Kuomintang party organized by him, for the first time embodied that spontaneous discontent in orderly concrete forms. that roamed the Chinese masses. Having won the sympathy of the petty bourgeoisie, the peasantry and the proletariat, the Sun Yat Sen party became the most significant force of Chinese nationalism, its militant organization in the struggle against imperialism and internal reaction. The 1911 revolution broke the monarchy, but it did not recover from the task of radical restructuring of the entire state organism. The previous bureaucratic reactionary apparatus remained in place and did its job, undermining the foundations of the new order. Sun-Yat-Sen, under pressure from rallied reactionary forces directed by foreign diplomacy, was forced to give way to the interim president to the old courtier of the Manchurians, Yuan Shi-kai, who, on the one hand, resumed contact with foreigners, continuing the sale of wealth | countries wholesale and retail, on the other hand, with the help of reactionary women, he pursued a policy of brutal repression against representatives of liberal and revolutionary thought, nullifying all the gains of the revolution. The subsequent era of Chinese history is characterized by the permanent struggle of individual militaristic cliques led by dudzuns and dubani (general-governors and governors) of individual regions, striving to achieve domination over the entire country. This struggle is exploited to their advantage by various foreign powers, in their interests to prevent the creation of a 'united national' state.In the era of the world war, the reactionary Chinese government, hoping for the generosity of the Entente powers in case of their victory, in 1917 joined them. declaring war on the central powers. These hopes, of course, did not come true, and the areas on the Shandong Peninsula taken from Germany passed to the Japanese, instead of returning to their rightful owner. The post-war era in China is characterized by an increase in the activity of the imperialist powers. The main roles are played by: England, which after 1921 changed Japan in favor of an alliance with America, Japan and the United States; these three states account for about 90% of all China's foreign trade (42% to England, 31% to Japan, 16o / o — the United States). Japan's interests are concentrated mainly in the north: in Manchuria and Shandong, as well as in Shanghai, British interests in the southern ports of the industrial region of Central China, American interests in the same ports, mainly in Shanghai. Each of these powers uses some Chinese general! as his agent, supporting him with money and weapons in order to achieve a strengthening of his influence in China. Japan relied on the Mukden satrap, Zhang-Tso-Lin, England, and America acted mainly through their protege, General. U Pei-fu, based in the valley of the river. Yangtze, sometimes not neglecting the alliance with Zhang-Tseo-Lin. Finally, a revolutionary, nationalist government was established in Canton, headed by Sun-Yat-Sen and the Kuomintang Party. The struggle between these groups in the era of the post-World War II was with varying success. The reactionary militarists strove to extend their power to the whole of China, from which, of course, the foreign powers supporting them benefited in the first place. In 1922, U-Pei-Fu, as a result of his victory over Chang-Tso-Ling, became the dictator of Central China, achieved decisive influence in Beijing and began to prepare the final destruction of his main rivals: Chang-Tso-Ling and the revolutionary government of South China. However, in 1924, as a result of a bloc of forces hostile to him and a sudden speech by General. Fyn-Yu-Hsiang, who staged a coup in Beijing, U-Pei-Fu suffers a great defeat. Fyn-Yu-Xiang, who has gained influence in Beijing and Central China, is increasingly drawing closer to the nationalist movement. Under the influence of this new danger, the former enemies, Chang-Tso-Lin and U-Pei-Fu, converge and develop an offensive against the People's Army organized by Fyn-Yu-Hsiang. In the summer of 1926, the People's Army was pushed back to the northwest outskirts of China, and a new reactionary government was formed in Beijing, consisting of the appointees of both militarists. At the same time, a third force, the Kuomintang party, was growing and gaining strength in southern China in the province of Guangdong which created in one of the most important ports of China Canton - a citadel of the national liberation struggle for the unification of China against imperialism. In 1925, the Chinese revolution suffered a heavy loss. The leader and organizer of the Kuomintang Sun-Yat-Sen died. However, despite this, the growth of the party's influence and its successes went ahead. Having secured its positions in Guan-Tung, the Cantonese government began to form a strong army to organize a campaign to the North. Political education of soldiers and The formation of reliable military and political commanders in the so-called Wampu school largely predetermined the successful outcome of the southern enterprise. The work of the Cantonese government proceeded in incredibly difficult conditions. The revolutionary Canton was a thorn in the eye of England, especially because of the proximity to English Hong Kong. Hong Kong, concessioned to England in 1842, became a stronghold of British trade in southern China, and therefore England continually obstructs the development of its rival port of Canton. In order to crush this "hotbed of revolution", England sets against Canton the northern generals and the militaristic groups of the neighboring provinces (Guang Xi and Yun Nan); without limiting itself to this, it is trying to inflame confusion in Canton itself, using for this the layers of the Cantonese bourgeoisie, economically connected with British capital. In 1924, these elements, organized into the corps of the so-called "paper tigers", raised an uprising, but were defeated due to the strictness of the Vakshu school. All of England's efforts to break Canton were unsuccessful. The canton continued to grow stronger, attracting the sympathy of the broad masses of the rest of China. Finally, in the fall of 1926, the Canton army embarked on a decisive campaign to the north, and in a short time, having defeated U-Pei-Fu, occupied the heart of the country, the industrial regions of Central China, transferred the capital of the national government to Hankou and, finally, in March 1927. enters Shanghai, where the insurgent workers seized power by expelling the reactionary army of the Shandong general Chang-Tsung-Chang. Under the influence of these colossal successes of the revolutionary troops, all the reactionary Chinese generals are united, organizing a united front against the southerners. England, the most active of all the imperialist powers, in turn is actively organizing a united front of all powers and begins an intensified transfer of troops to Shanghai, preparing the intervention. We have already spoken of those social groups on which the national revolutionary movement was based. However, in the process of recent years there has been a certain differentiation between them, influencing the further prospects of the Chinese revolution. In connection with the aggravation of the class struggle, the Chinese proletariat, which has shown extraordinary steadfastness and fighting efficiency in recent years, is coming to the fore. The Shanghai and Hong Kong strikes directed against the imperialists, the growth of the trade union movement embracing ever wider circles of workers and women workers, and the role of workers' organizations in the offensive of the national army are striking proof of the leading importance that the Chinese proletariat is acquiring in the revolutionary struggle. The allies of the proletariat are: the petty bourgeoisie, which suffers the most from the yoke of foreign capital, the petty-bourgeois intelligentsia and students, artisans, numbering in their ranks up to 7 million people, and, finally, the multimillion-dollar masses of the peasantry, exploited by the kulaks, usurers and foreign capital, who begin to sway little by little. On the contrary, the big bourgeoisie and a group of trade intermediaries (compradors), closely connected with foreign capital, fearing the growing activity of the working class, seek to come to terms with foreigners. This divergence was reflected within the Kuomintang party itself. the group of this party, representing the interests and aspirations of the working masses and small traders, continues to work together with the Chinese Communist Party and remains in fact true to the 3 basic principles of Sun Yat Sen: 1) nationalism, understood as China's national independence and its liberation from the there are no imperialists, 2) democracy, in the sense of political equality and a republican form of government, and 3) socialism, that is, radical agrarian reform and restriction of the initiative of private capital. The right trend, reflecting the interests of the big bourgeoisie, under the influence of the growth of the labor movement, increasingly departed from the previous revolutionary position, and sought a compromise with foreigners. The decisive turning point in the national revolutionary movement was the treacherous speech of the leader right-wing Kuomintang, commander-in-chief of the Canton army, gene. Chiang Kai-shek, who carried out a counter-revolutionary coup in Shanghai in April 1927 and shot a workers' demonstration. These events, coinciding with an extremely acute and tense moment of a decisive clash between the national movement and world imperialism (the bombing of Nanking, the concentration of foreign troops and ships in Chinese ports, etc.), signify the onset of a new phase in the Chinese revolution. From now on, the big bourgeoisie is turning into the camp of enemies of the revolution, which becomes the business of exclusively the Chinese working masses. The leadership of this genuine national revolutionary movement, after the betrayal of Chiang Kai-shek and his associates, is in the hands of the government of the left Kuomintang, whose capital was transferred from Canton to Wuhan 3 cities of Central China: Hankou, Wuchang and Hanyang). In Wuhanek area located in the richest region of China, the valley of the river. Yang Tzu, which is the center of Chinese heavy industry, contains the most organized and numerous cadres of the Chinese proletariat. Therefore, this area has always been the center of the revolutionary! movement and it is no coincidence that it was from here that the revolution of 1911 began, and the general became an ally of the Wuhan government. Fyn-Yu-Hsiang, who, upon his return from the USSR, again took command over the surviving part of the People's Army and launched an offensive on Beijing.