1. General outline of the country
Persia occupies a significant part of the Iranian plateau. By its territory (1.650.000 sq. Km.) It is larger than France, Germany, Spain and Belgium combined. In the north, Persia borders on the USSR; in the south it is washed by the waters of the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Sea; in the west, Persia borders on the Arab Kingdom of Iraq (English, Mandate, Territory) and Turkey; in the east with Afghanistan and Baluchistan. The population of Persia is approximately estimated at 10,000000 people. (exact statistics do not exist in Persia). The composition of the population is as follows: Farsites or Persians proper — 55-60%, Turkic-Mongols —25%, other various nationalities about 15 ° / o-Most of the country's surface is covered with numerous mountain ranges with valleys between them. In Central Persia, there are vast saline deserts (Dasht-i-Kavir and Dasht-i-Lut). The main occupation of the inhabitants is agriculture. The most suitable areas for agricultural work are the Caspian provinces, Seistan and the Karuna river valley. A significant increase in agriculture in Persia is hampered by a lack of water. The need for artificial irrigation creates significant difficulties for the correct use of the unusually fertile Persian soil. In addition, the weak side of Persian agriculture is also the primitive forms of land cultivation, technically backward and helpless. The main products of Persian agriculture are wheat, rice, cotton, opium and fruits. Regions of northern Persia rank first in terms of the number of crops planted with grain and fruit. The coast of the Persian Gulf is rich in dates, which are one of the most important exports of Persian Arabistan. A fairly significant economic sector of the country is animal husbandry. Livestock raising is spread mainly in the areas of nomadic tribes and serves as their main source of income. Sheep breeding is most developed, which is of great importance, both for domestic consumption and for export. Turning to other sectors of the national economy of Persia, it should be noted that it has rather large mineral wealth, which is still almost completely undeveloped. The absence of '-ways of communication, plus primitive and costly methods of development, make the exploitation of mining subsoil commercially unprofitable for the time being. Moreover, Persia is rich in oil. The main oil-bearing lands are located in the south of Persia and are being developed by an English concession company, namely the Anglo-Persian Oil Company. Oil deposits have also been found in Northern Persia, but they have not yet begun to be exploited. According to Muslim law, the land in Persia cannot be a private property. In fact, this law has not been fulfilled for a long time. The theory is completely at variance with established landowning practice. In fact, land in Persia is fully owned by individuals. The official forms of Persian land tenure are: 1) state land (khalise), 2) church land (vakuf), 3) communal (umumi), 4) landlord (arbabi) and small-scale (khurd- malik). The main type of land relations in Persia is large-scale land ownership. A huge part of the land area is in the hands of large landowners who often own more than 200-300 villages. The harsh land mobilization that took place in Persia led to the fact that most of the entire land fund was at the disposal of a small group of khans and tax farmers who came out of the ranks of the big trading bourgeoisie. The fate of the Persian peasant is hard and bitter. Hard work, eternal lack of food, servitude, servitude, The exploitation of the landowner haunts him throughout his life. The Persian village, where the Persian peasant lives and works, is a bunch of dirty houses molding around each other, heating up in the heat and giving no shade in winter. In summer days, when the whole family is a Persian peasant. goes to work, dirty kids dressed in rags are busy with sad herds near empty shacks. Rarely, rarely in a Persian village you can meet funny and laughing kids. Early need and the hopelessness of the environment leave a mark of premature seriousness and concern on children's faces. Only late in the evening do the tired peasants return home. The work of the Persian peasant is thankless. A wooden shovel — instead of a plow, horse hooves for squeezing grain out of the ears and the same kind of primitive tools — that's all he has to work his small plot. Lack of water, the need for artificial irrigation also play a significant role in the distressing peasant situation, but the worst scourge for the Persian peasant is rent bondage. The Persian peasant is forced to give the almighty landowner a good half of his difficult harvest, and himself be content with a half-starved existence. In the hands of the landowner, in addition to the land and water supplies necessary for irrigation, there are also draft animals, grain for sowing fields, which are loaned to peasants under difficult conditions. EU whether to add more state taxes, the position of the Persian peasant looms in all its unsightly clarity. Approximately 3/3 of his entire peasant income goes to pay various levies and taxes. All that remains for the Persian peasant to feed himself and his family. Industry in the literal sense of the word in Persia almost does not exist. One of the main reasons for the severe stagnation of the Persian national economy is the lack of convenient communication routes. Persia, with the exception of the small Julfa-Tabriz line, has no railways at all. The main type of Persian transport is pack. Caravans of camels and donkeys leisurely deliver goods from one point in Persia to another. Cars circulating between major cities are fighting with them for the road. Rows of frightened camels, caught by a car, rush in all directions, dump bales from fear and often die under the wheels of the engine. The car and the camel are two opposites, two poles of the modern Persian road. There are few large cities in Persia. The most important of them are: Tehran, Tabriz, Mashhad, Isfa Gan, Shiraz and several ports on the coast of the Persian Gulf and the Caspian Sea. In appearance, Persian cities are not much different from villages. From a distance, a city from a village or village can be distinguished only by a slightly wider area and by a larger number of buildings. Once the Persian city was surrounded by an adobe wall. The streets of the Persian city are terribly narrow. The main city arteries are called "khibans" (avenues). These are the same streets, but a little more tidy and with a kind of pavement. A Persian street is characterized by running water running on both sides, or in the middle. This water is used for washing clothes, performing ritual ablutions, etc. Due to its terrible pollution, this very water is one of the important reasons for the extreme anti-hygienic state of Persian cities. Being essentially ditches, it is very harmful and unhealthy. Its frequent use as drinking water leads to various epidemic diseases. The central nerve of the city is the bazaar. The Persian Bazaar is not only a collection of stalls and stalls; it also has political significance. The voice of the Persian bazaar is impressive; they listen to him, a lot depends on him; they are afraid of him. This is not surprising, if we remember that the predominant type of Persian merchant class is a small market trader who very, very much influences public opinion. The bazaar also serves as an instrument of political struggle. The closure of a bazaar is an act of protest, something like a demonstration, a strike, etc. Bazaars in large cities are usually covered buildings with countless intricate passages and passages. Slightly shaded sunlight streams through the tall, tile-covered dome. Entering the bazaar, you immediately find yourself in the atmosphere of the fierce eastern hustle and bustle, sharp noise and specific smells. It smells like nutmeg, orange. There is a faint scent of palm trees from the heaped mountains of fresh dates and coconuts. On both sides of the bazaar galleries are shops. Here are a number of the manufactory trade: mountains of fabrics, patterned Persian silks, foreign fabrics, the so-called "colonial cheapness" thrown by foreign importers on the undemanding Persian market. Next are the craft ranks. Here the air splits from the impact of copper and from the metal fuss of tools, working here artisans. Not only people, but also donkeys, laden to overload, scurry along the narrow aisles of the marketplace. In the evenings, kerosene lamps are placed on these donkeys, throwing sparse light into the back streets of the market. Here, on the territory of the bazaar, for visiting merchants there are "caravanserais" with extensive storage rooms. Camels that have come from afar are located in them. From early morning to late evening, the bazaar does not stop its intense activity. It works like a wound-up machine, accompanied by the shuffling of numerous feet and a high guttural dialect. * ** Persia has long been a tasty morsel for European powers (mainly for tsarist Russia and England), interested in its dismemberment as quickly enslavement. The entire recent history of Persia is marked by outright plunder and violence by foreign imperialism. Tsarist Russia and England strove at all costs to weaken the resistance of the Persian state, to make it completely helpless in order to transform Persia into their colony. in Persia, a certain shift begins towards breaking up the old reactionary forms of economic relations. This time is characteristic of Persia with a large increase in Western influences, and an influx of foreign capital, which gradually pulled Persia into the orbit of the world economy. England and then Tsarist Russia, leaving overt methods of armed violence to influence Persia, switched to the system of the so-called "peace penetration ". Through various financial transactions, mainly loans to the Persian government, which is always in need of money, England and Russia are gradually acquiring a decisive influence on the economic and political life of the country. Little by little, all the lucrative articles of the Persian national economy float away into foreign hands. So England and Russia were given numerous concessions to exploit the most important wealth of Persia. All Persian customs, banks, communication routes, etc., were at their disposal. The ever-increasing inflow of foreign capital to Persia contributed to a change in the old feudal forms of the Persian economy. The former isolated position that Persia occupied with its subsistence economy began to change gradually. A previously non-existent foreign market appears for it, consuming the products of Persian agriculture; commercial capital with its representative of the petty commercial bourgeoisie was born. in Persia was marked by general, widespread dissatisfaction with the internal system of government of the Qajar dynasty, as well as shameless enslavement of Persia by foreign imperialism. The young Persian bourgeoisie was bound hand and foot by a state system that did not meet its interests at all. Attempts by the Persian merchant bourgeoisie to switch over to their local factory industry have met with failure due to fierce foreign competition. The Shah's government did absolutely nothing to protect the main interests of the indigenous industry, but, on the contrary, entered into customs agreements with foreign states (England and Russia), which were extremely beneficial for the latter. The Persian clergy were not happy with the existing system. It feared for its privileges and influence in the country. Frightened by the government's interference in its hitherto monopoly area of ​​justice and public education, the clergy begins to rebel and oppose the old regime, which is already beginning to crack. The feudal lords are also dissatisfied. The Shah, gradually selling the country to foreigners, does not share with anyone. Feudal lords, accustomed to the division of profits, begin to get embittered, seeing that they did not get anything, that they were bypassed.In 1906, under the direct influence of the Russian revolution of 1905, a struggle began for a new form of government — the Persian constitution. The instigator of the revolutionary movement was the urban handicraft bourgeoisie, with the support of a part of the Persian clergy and at first even large landowners, which achieved victory. The constitution was won. But already in 1908, reactionary elements, with the active support of tsarist Russia, crushed the 1st Majlis (Persian, parliament). The triumph of the reactionaries did not last long. In the north and south, revolutionary detachments are formed from both sides, moving to Tehran, which, after several battles with the Shah's troops, was occupied. Mohammed Ali Shah was forced to flee and take refuge in Russia. The trade and craft bourgeoisie, which was the most active element in the struggle for a constitution, having achieved it, was unable to retain its positions. On the contrary, the large feudal landowners contrived to use the new conditions 100%. Using the voices of their peasants, who are entirely dependent on them, the landowners easily carried out the candidates they needed for the Mejlis, thus making it an obedient instrument in their hands. The onslaught of foreign imperialism on Persia after the revolution not only did not diminish, but, on the contrary, reached colossal proportions. In 1907, the famous agreement on the division of Persia into zones of influence was concluded between England and Russia. In fact, with this treaty, the two imperialist powers, without the knowledge of the Persian people, arbitrarily, without asking anyone, cut Persia into two halves. One half (northern), under the agreement, went to Russia for its undivided political and economic exploitation. On the same terms, the southern part of Persia went to England, which contributed to the rapid disappointment of the radical layers of the Persian people with the real results of the revolutionary movement, and especially in England. England, at the beginning of the Persian revolution of 1906-9, provided all kinds of support to the Persian revolutionaries in their struggle against the old regime, English "revolutionary spirit" was explained by nothing more than a desire to spoil tsarist Russia closely associated with reactionary groups, in particular with Mohammed himself -Ali Shah. Later this situation changed. England, frightened by the rapid growth of the revolutionary movement in the country, very soon found a common language with Tsarist Russia, so that the subsequent stages of the struggle for a constitution passed under the sign of joint Anglo-Russian pressure on the revolutionary movement, and joint attempts to strangle it. , despite its declared strict neutrality, it was turned into a springboard for the Anglo-Russian troops conducting military operations against Turkey. In fact, during these years, Persia did not exist as an independent state. The true masters of the country were the Turkish, English and Russian prowling on its territory.troops. The October Revolution liberated the Persian people from their primordial enemy, tsarist imperialism. The Soviet government, in connection with its general policy, abandoned the old violent methods of tsarist Russia towards Persia. It renounced all the privileges and advantages enjoyed by foreigners in Persia, it returned the property that belonged to the Persian people, canceled all agreements and treaties with England directed against Persia, etc. England, taking advantage of the withdrawal of Russia, began to rapidly seize the abandoned positions. She extends her influence not only to southern Persia, but also to northern Persia. Anglo-Persian trade is growing. In 1918-19. she ranks first. The culminating point of British rule in Persia is the conclusion in 1919 of the famous Anglo-Persian treaty. Under this treaty, Persia effectively became an English colony; fortunately for Persia, this treaty was not destined to be enforced. This was prevented by many circumstances, mainly the influence of Soviet Russia, which was friendly and benevolent to its eastern neighbor. In 1921, a Russian-Persian treaty was signed, which consolidated friendly ties between both peoples. In the same year, the activity of Reza Khan, who is now the head of the Pahlavi dynasty, begins. Reza Khan, an officer of the central Cossack division, was the soul of the coup in Tehran in 1921. As a result of the latter, Reza Khan becomes Minister of War. He forms a national army and by force of arms subjugates the border semi-feudal khans, who until that time were almost independent from the central government. Soon Reza Khan was already the prime minister and supreme commander in chief. He suppresses the uprising inspired by England in the south and leads a course aimed at strengthening and centralizing Persia. The movement against the Qajar dynasty, which began in 1924 in the country, takes on a republican character. The same Reza Khan is being nominated for the presidency. Thanks to the backwardness of the masses and the reactionary role of the Persian clergy, feudal lords and landowners, the slogans of the republic are being defeated. The second part of Reza Khan's activity is already of a somewhat different character. Relying at the beginning of his career on the so-called "progressive bloc" consisting of the trade and artisan bourgeoisie and the urban intelligentsia, Reza Khan gradually begins to draw closer to the reactionary landowning groups and clergy. The reactionary role of the top strata of the Persian army is also of great importance. The officers, thanks to the system of distribution of large estates for military merit, turned into a group closely associated with representatives of large commercial landownership. By this time, Reza Khan himself was the largest landowner in Persia. On October 31, 1925, the Majlis decided to overthrow the old Qajar dynasty. On December 12, 1925, Reza Khan was elected shah and head of the new Pahlavi dynasty by the founding assembly of Reza Khan. The fact of the establishment of a monarchical regime in Persia can serve as a kind of completion of the compromise and half-hearted policy that was pursued by Reza Khan in the second half of his activities. to its essence, it is not capable at the present time of truly reformatory activity. Hence the 'treading water and uncertain policy in many areas of political and cultural life of Persia, in particular in the women's question of interest to us. The national liberation movement in Persia is far from complete. The English "danger" still has very strong and strong roots. The future of Persia largely depends on the path that it will choose. It must make a choice between the predatory and tenacious British imperialism, seeking to rely at the moment on Reza Shah and the Soviet Union, a friend of the oppressed eastern countries, an enemy of all violence and seizure. 