1. General outline of the Komi region
The autonomous region of Komi (Zyryanskaya) is part of the RSFSR, occupying the northeastern corner of its European part with a total surface area of ​​478.660 sq. kilometers. This territory, bounded from the north by the Arctic Ocean, from the east by the Ural ridge, and from the south by the Northern Uval, is a huge lowland, overgrown by 8 4 powerful, often impenetrable forests. To the north, near the coast of the Arctic Ocean, forests, giving way to frost, thin out and, finally, they pass into the tundra, sparsely overgrown with mosses and shrubs. But what. farther to the south, the more and more they spread out both in breadth and upward, passing in places into completely insurmountable jungles and presenting a majestic picture of primitive thickets almost untouched by man. The composition of forest species varies according to their geographic location. Closer to the north and in high places — larch, spruce and pine; along the river valleys and to the south — birch, aspen, black alder, cedar, oak. Occasionally this landscape is interrupted by arable land or meadows reclaimed as a result of the tense struggle of the farmer with the forests. In most cases, arable and meadow land lies along the rivers that make up here the oldest and, unfortunately, the only way to travel, because the region, by the grace of the old (tsarist) economic policy, is completely devoid of railways. The river network is dense enough. Among them it should be noted the Pechora with its numerous tributaries and the Vychegda. The rivers are rich in water. In addition, the region abounds in lakes, often connected by channels. The richest animal world of the region is in full accordance with the vegetation. In the north - ermine, arctic fox, marten, fox, and, of course, the constant breadwinner, deer. To the south, in the forests, bear, wolf, fox, elk, deer, squirrel, hare and a lot of game, of which hazel grouse and black grouse attract hunters most of all. There is a wide variety of fish along the ocean coast and in numerous lakes and ponds. Natural resources include graphite, oil (Ukhta river), coal (Usa river), gold (Ilych river) and iron. Climatic conditions are harsh. Not to mention the tundra and the areas adjacent to the sea coast, even to the south, winter is harsh and long. Although the summer is relatively hot, as, indeed, in all areas with a pronounced continental climate, the average annual temperature is about 0 °, and in any case not higher than 1 °. The Autonomous Region of Komi, formed on May 5, 1921 from the Ust-Sysolsk district and part of the Yarensky district of the North-Dvinsk province, part of the Pechora district of the Arkhangelsk province and part of the Cherdyn district of the Perm province, is currently divided into Izhmo-Pechora, Sysolsky, Ust-Vymsky and Ust-Kulomsky districts. Its population is over 220,000 people, of which 95.8% is the population of Koikhsel, and the urban population (8,800 people) is almost exclusively in the main city of the region, Ust-Sysolsk (7,130 people). Among the population, the predominant ethnic group are the Komi-Zyryans (Zyryan-92%, Russians-6%, Samoyeds-2%). The Komi (Zyryans and Permians), together with the Votyaks, are representatives of the eastern branch of the Finnish tribe and are the inhabitants of the region. In any case, evidence about them (mainly about Perm) is available in the Scandinavian sagas, in which they are known under the name Biarmia and from which one can conclude about a fairly high degree of material well-being, which the Komi achieved by the end of the first millennium of our era. Relations between Russia and the region began in the 11th century. In this century, the Novgorodians already took tribute from Pechora, and therefore from all the tribes who lived on the way there. The history of colonial invasion and capture of the region is common for that time. At first, the Novgorod ushkuiniks (pirate merchants), who sailed along the river systems on special boats (ears), were either engaged in direct robbery of the population, sometimes in the form of tribute, or in predatory commodity exchange. The ushkuiniks were followed by monks who established monasteries, seizing the best places and mercilessly plundering the population, and, finally, the princely and tsarist governors who improved the system. At the end of the 15th century, the Zyryans, who were so called Russians (they called themselves Komi), accept, however, purely outwardly, Christianity, and the growing Moscow, finally crowds out Novgorod, which is already tending to decline. In the future, the region shares the fate of numerous conquered regions and transfers the dominion of the tsarist governors, autocratic merchants (Stroganovs), governors and officials who knew no boundaries to arbitrariness and robbed the population with impunity. The following economic reference can serve as a vivid illustration of this several hundred years of predatory plunder of the population. At the beginning of our century, the main owner of the Ust-Sysolsk district was the state, which owned 15.500.000 dessiatines; about 73,000 dessiatines belonged to the family of the breeder Benardaki, and the total indigenous population accounted for about 61,000 dessiatines, of which only 43,500 dessiatines were arable land and hay. With such an amount of land, the share of the peasant household on average got about 350-380 poods of hay per year. d, i.e. not enough to feed a cow and horse. The numbers speak for themselves. In addition, they have a long history behind them, a whole mournful chronicle of colonial oppression, accompanied, in addition to economic ruin, by humiliating forms of everyday slavery, a flood of atrocities on the part of newcomers who did everything with impunity that their fantasy of tyrants told them. the front temporarily captured the edge. This seizure was stimulated mainly by the desire of British capitalism to seize the richest forest resources of the region. The White Guard hirelings, having previously enlisted the help of the kulak upper circles of the population, achieved temporary successes, flooding the forests and rivers of the region with the blood of the communists and the poor. Communists were drowned, shot and hanged in dozens and hundreds. But the short-term domination of the whites opened the eyes of the working people to the real nature of the hirelings of British capital and Russian landowners and manufacturers. Whites were expelled, and the pre-revolutionary ratio of land holdings was radically redistributed. At present, the total amount accounted for by manor land, arable land, hayfields and pasture is estimated at about 200 thousand dessiatines. The gross collection gives no more than 7.4 poods per capita. Livestock accounted for: 104.5 horses per 100 households, 232 cattle, 228 small cattle, 13.9 pigs. As a general conclusion, we can state the weak economic stability of the average agricultural economy of the region, especially if we take into account the very uneven economic power of individual farms and the presence of a strong kulak element, which sharply reduces the figures for the poor and even the middle farms. It is becoming quite obvious that there is a need for subsidiary trades, which the population is engaged in, mainly in the form of reindeer husbandry, hunting, hunting and fishing. Industry is almost completely absent in the region: as of October 1, 1925, there were 6 factory establishments with a total of 300 workers employed mainly in the mining industry. The reasons hampering the economic development of the region, first of all, must be attributed to the lack of communication routes, isolating it from consuming markets and preventing the use of the richest economic opportunities: of the annual growth of wood, calculated at 8.711 thousand cubic fathoms, only 252 thousand , i.e. 3 ° / 0. This circumstance, i.e. cut off from the market and difficulty in marketing, of course, significantly lowers the economic stability of the average peasant farm, shifting onto its shoulders high overhead costs for transporting goods and creating extreme difficulty in marketing the products of production. The economic heterogeneity of the Zyryan peasant farm has already been noted above. Along with the well-to-do, kulak-type economy, typical, for example, of the Izhemtsy (along the Izhma River), one can often find a poor man who feeds exclusively on "kach" - kasha made from dried crushed bark. This heterogeneity determines, of course, the living conditions in which the Zyryan has to live. If the hut of a prosperous owner is spacious and tidy, consists of several rooms, with the obligatory "godfather" room for guests - richly decorated with carvings inside, painted with bright red, green and yellow flowers, with a stove that does not let smoke into the room, - the poor do not only there is no "godfather", but he often lives in a chicken hut, filled with smoke during the fire. To exit, the latter is provided with either a wide open front door or a special "overhead door" - a simple hole, slid from the inside by a board when the stove is not heated. Sometimes, a wooden chimney is attached to the stove (going into the canopy and from there to the roof). Under these conditions and those frosts that prevail in the region, it is warm only in the upper parts of the dwelling, which is why the inhabitants arrange special beds that occupy almost half of the hut. This also explains the peculiar appearance of the Zyryan dwellings, in which the windows are located almost under the roof itself: family members usually spend all the time on the top, the light is more needed above than below. The type of clothing dictates the climate. The main winter costume is a malitsa — a bag made of reindeer skins, with fur inside, with holes for the head and legs, and with fur sleeves; on their feet - pimas, deep boots made of reindeer skins. This is the main and necessary winter outfit for a northern inhabitant. Even women don't cheat. it, decorating it only with skins and scraps of cloth. However, a number of residents wear, especially in summer, Russian-style clothes, although the malitsa dominates in everyday life. Women in the summer wear sundresses or simply canvas shirts, intercepted at the chest with a special bodice made of dye. Food, in general, is very modest, although the abundance of game allows you to eat meat more often than, for example, in the Central Russian zone. For this, the lack of bread affects very sharply and, as already noted above, a significant number of residents eat "kach" all winter, saving bread to hard spring work. In addition, milk, both cow and reindeer milk, and, of course, fish, is used for food, although in view of the high cost and poor quality of salt, it is not prepared for future use. And in clothes and in food, there are, of course, many shades created by one or another the degree of material well-being. This latter also determines the way of life. While the more prosperous Zyrian spends a significant part of his time at home, exploiting the laborer labor of the Samoyeds, excellent reindeer herders, to graze his herds, the poor Zyryan is forced to spend almost all his time outside the house, in the summer in the field or fishing, in the winter in the "winters" —Forest huts — on a hunt that sometimes lasts for months. In a difficult struggle with nature, step by step conquering scraps of arable land from the forest, in constant labor, continuously retreating under the predatory onslaught of the Novgorod and Moscow freemen, partially mixing with the conquerors and perceiving their customs and customs forced to push his pagan beliefs into the Christianity imposed on him by greedy monks, in the fight against the predatory instincts of his rich relatives, who quickly learned the lessons of robbery and violence and turned this science not only towards foreign Samoyeds or Ostyaks, but also against it, the Zyrian kept his language and customs and created his own way of life. He is Orthodox. But the belief in goblin, water brownies (ort) and other gods survived baptism. The Christian god is identified with Ian, the creator of the universe, in the affairs of which he does not interfere, as well as in the affairs of people. Christian saints (Ilya, Nikolai) turned into little gods. To clarify the nature of the attitude of the population to Orthodoxy, we note the following characteristic fact. Among the Zyryan everyday plots there are many tales of fools, and very often a priest or a deacon act as the most comic heroes. The fact of the stability of the religious beliefs of the Zyrian pagan has its basis in the environment and conditions of polar cattle breeding and characterizes only the resistance small people gave to their colonial oppressors. This national stability was most clearly manifested in the preservation of the language, and, for example, the Izhemtsy, representing a mixture of Russians and Komi in their ethnographic type, speak a pure Zyryan language. Many Zyryans, especially women, do not know the Russian language at all, although, of course, long-term domination and cohabitation left clear traces of Russian cultural influences not only in the language, but also in everyday life, and many Zyryan legends, tales and songs were directly borrowed from the Russians ( for example, epics about Ilya Muromets). Meanwhile, it should be noted that the russification policy of tsarism knew such facts as the prohibition of boys to speak their native language under the threat of being deprived of the opportunity to study. The October Revolution buried Tsarist Russia, and with it the attempts to stifle the national identity and culture of the peoples inhabiting it. If before 1918, for example, in the Pechora district there were only 5 public libraries and several school libraries, then by 1921 it had 22 volost libraries, 14 reading rooms, 12 theaters and 3 clubs organized on the initiative of the localities.

Of this number, there were 18 Zyryansk libraries, 6 reading rooms, 10 theaters and 2 clubs. The drive for enlightenment in the region is enormous. Not to mention the fact that literacy among Zyryans, in general, is very high in comparison with other sectors of the all-Union front of education (the percentage of literacy - in Russian and Komi languages ​​- 28.2%), the state of the school network alone provides clear evidence of this ... According to the data for 1924, there were 221 schools with 13,122 students in the region, 6 with 2,764 students in seven years, 5 with 966 students in 2 levels, and 3 with 389 students in technical schools. The number of Komi students in the higher educational institutions of the Union reaches 300 people, and provides the future of the region with cultural workers. Speaking about the cultural or economic revival of the region, which came with the Soviet regime, one should not lose sight of the colossal difficulties that stand in this way. The main one is off-road. And if you consider that on G / 2 sq. km of territory accounts for only 1 person, and the villages are often separated from each other at a distance of 100-150 km. then it will become clear the need for unanimous and strenuous efforts capable of providing the region with the necessary cultural and economic flourishing.