1. General information about the Kamchatka-Chukchi Territory
The Kamchatka-Chukchi Territory covers the most extreme northeastern tip of the Asian continent. From the east it is washed by the Sea of ​​Okhotsk, from the north by the Arctic Ocean. The narrow Bering Strait (60 miles wide) separates it from the Alaska Peninsula, i.e. from the American continent. Now this whole region in administrative terms constitutes one Kamchatka province, stretching over a huge stretch and having an area of ​​1.182 thousand square meters. versts Kamchatka province is divided into 5 counties: ^ Petropavlovsky, 2) Okhotsky, 3) Gizhiginsky, 4) Anadyr, 5) Chukotsky. In addition to these counties, it also includes the islands: Komandorskie, Karaginsky, Olsky and Wrangel. The southern part of the region is occupied by the Kamchatka Peninsula, which forms the Petropavlovsk district. Here is the administrative center of the entire region - mountains. Petropavlovsk. The regional capital is, at the same time, the largest city in this entire vast region; according to the most recent data in 1923, its population consists of 1,193 people. Petropavlovsk is located near the southern part of the Kamchatka River valley in the so-called Avacha Bay near a small but convenient bay. The Petropavlovsk district even extends northeast to the Akhtyrka River, followed by Anadyr district. In the Anadyr district there are two significant villages: Anadyr, the center of the district, a deaf tiny port with developed fishing industries and a radio station, and the village of Markovo .. Finally, in the extreme northeast, starting from the Bay of the Holy Cross, is the Chukotka district, formed on the territory of the Chukotka Peninsula. This county is closest to America, and therefore American influence is already felt here. Its main city, Port Wellen on the Arctic Ocean, is often visited by American schooners who buy furs here. American whaling ships also come here. Some Americans live here permanently. The Kamchatka-Chukchi Territory is a predominantly mountainous country, although the variety of landscapes is very great here. Along the entire eastern coast of Kamchatka, there are high mountain ranges, densely overgrown with bushes and forests; volcanoes are often found among the Kamchatka mountains, from time to time they remind of themselves by destructive earthquakes. Along with the mountain ranges, the peninsula also has swampy tundra alternating with lush northern forests; the prevailing trees here are birch, aspen, larch, spruce, etc. The mountainous character weakens as we approach the northeastern end of the region. Chukotka Peninsula Deprived of high mountains; here there are more low cliffs and hills. In the climatic region it is difficult to give one definition common to the entire region. Its dimensions are so large that in different regions we see completely different climatic conditions. In the south, say, in the Petropavlovsk region, the average annual temperature is not lower than 2 ° C; winters here are relatively mild, humid and snowy, with maximum frosts of 28 °. At the same time, the northern part of the region is characterized by a harsh climate, where in winter frosts reach 50 ° C. Naturally, the climate-softer southern part of the region is more populated and more accessible for cultural and economic development. The south of the Kamchatka Peninsula is the most populated area. The population of the Petropavlovsk uyezd is 12,162, while the Chukotka uyezd has 6,025, Anadyr — 5,737, Gizhiginsky — 6,500 and Okhotsk — 5,300. Thus, the population of the entire province is only 36,000 people. This shows how desolate and abandoned the outskirts of this vast and rich land are. The harsh climate and 'scarce frozen soil make it impossible to plant and develop agriculture, and, of course, this circumstance, as we will see later, is a great obstacle to cultural progress. local foreigners who remain at the lowest level of the economic structure. Attempts to instill agricultural skills in the inhabitants of Kamchatka have been made for a long time; For the first time in the middle of the 18th century, the Russian government began to evict the Cossack and peasant (agricultural population) here, hoping in this way to create a Russian agricultural colony in Kamchatka. However, this experience, as well as the subsequent attempts, did not lead to positive results. Now there is almost no agriculture in the region. Only in a few areas of the southern strip are they sowing barley, flax and hemp, and even then on a very small scale. And yet, despite this, the Kamchatka Territory can justly be considered one of the richest regions of the Union. Already before, visiting American whalers and fur buyers argued that this region is rich in minerals and primarily gold.Now it has been established with certainty that gold lies within the Kamchatka province, mainly in the Anadyr district; in addition, there are deposits of platinum, coal, iron and, finally , oil in the valley of the Bogachevka River flowing in the Petropavlovsk district. However, almost no a critical step in the sense of the exploitation of this wealth, or at least the organization of a careful exploration to establish the area of ​​deposits. The fish resources of the Region are also of great importance; to understand the size of the local fisheries, it is enough to point out that the catch in 1924 was determined by the figure of 112,410,800, and there are predominantly very valuable species of fish here: chum salmon, crabs, red, etc. Finally, the greatest and main wealth of the Region is fur. The most rare and valuable species of fur-bearing animals are concentrated here: sable, ermine, sea beaver, fur seal, white and blue arctic fox, otter, squirrel, wolverine. It is these fur riches that attract the Americans here, shamelessly robbing and drinking foreign hunters and contributing to the predatory extermination of valuable fur animals. The population of the Kamchatka-Chukotka Territory is extremely diverse; the overwhelming majority are sedentary and nomadic indigenous tribes, numbering about 29,000 people. There are not many Russians here, about 7,000 people, concentrated in urban and large settlements of the region. There are also foreigners here: Koreans, Japanese, Chinese and Americans, the latter mainly on the Chukchi coast. Their number is absolutely insignificant; no more than 700 people. The indigenous part of the population itself, as already mentioned, does not represent a homogeneous whole. First of all, it can be divided into two main groups: sedentary and nomadic. The nomadic indigenous group has a significant quantitative superiority over the sedentary: it numbers 19,600 people, while the sedentary - only 9,000. This sedentary part of the native population consists almost entirely of Kamchadals, that is, a mixed tribe, formed by the merger of the most ancient inhabitants of the peninsula with alien Cossacks, Siberian peasants, Kalmyks, etc. ' Kamchadals live mainly in the south of Kamchatka, and also in smaller numbers in other areas of the peninsula. They, like everyone else, are engaged almost exclusively in hunting and fishing and only in some places agriculture. The area inhabited by Kamchadals proper extends from Cape Lopatka further north to the river. Tigil. The tribe of the Koryaks, akin to the Kamchadals, predominates behind Tigil, and in contrast to them, they have largely preserved their identity. The Koryaks have long and stubbornly opposed the introduction of Russian influence; to this day they remain in the overwhelming majority with a nomadic lifestyle. The Koryaks occupy the entire northern part of the Petropavlovsk district and the southern part of Anadyr; the north of the Anadyr district and the entire Chukotka district are mostly populated by the Chukchi with an admixture of Koryaks and Eskimos. In addition to these tribes, one could name a number of other national groups that exist within the Kamchatka province. They live here: Lamut, mainly in the north of Kamchatka, Ainu, south of Cape Lopatki, Aleuts on the Commander Islands. Not being able to highlight the features of each of these groups within the limits of a small brochure, we will limit ourselves only to Kamchadals, Koryaks and Chukchi, especially since the position of a woman, her role in the family and in economic life, is almost the same for all the indigenous tribes inhabiting the region. now give the most brief and basic information about the history of this region. The penetration of Russians into Siberia began during the reign of Ivan the Terrible, that is, in the second half of the 16th century. As you know, the representatives of the Cossack freemen, who were at the same time warriors, merchants and robbers, were the conductors of these conquering aspirations of the Moscow Kingdom. In 1581, the leader of these Cossacks, Ermak, seized the capital of the Siberian Khanate and, thus, the Muscovy acquired an immense richest country, the possibilities of which are still present! time is not only not fully used, but not even studied in detail. Siberia at that time captivated the conquerors mainly with its fur riches, since furs were one of the most valuable commodities in Muscovite Rus and Western Europe. Conquering foreigners, the Cossacks immediately set about collecting tribute — yasak in the form of expensive furs, which partly went to the collectors themselves, partly sent to Moscow, to the tsar. The conquerors went further and further into the depths of Siberia. Not on this path did they have to overcome the stubborn and desperate resistance of the natives, who furiously defended every inch of the earth from foreign invasion. Numerous battles and skirmishes between the Russians and the natives were always bloody and characterized by extreme cruelty. The preponderance nevertheless turned out to be on the side of the newcomers, who, in a relatively short period, managed to reach the extreme northeastern tip of the vast Asian continent. In 1644, the Cossack Dezhnev, after whom the cape was named, founded the Anadyr prison (settlement) on the Chukchi Peninsula, and 53 years later, one of the clerks of this prison, Atlasov, laid the foundation for the first winter quarters on the Kamchatka Peninsula. From that time on, the Russian conquerors began an era of predatory, autocratic rule in the conquered regions of Siberia. The overwhelming majority of the leaders here were people from the same dashing, robbery Cossacks; power and opportunities (enrichment corrupted and intoxicated them even more. An atmosphere of constant robbery, wild violence against foreigners, drunkenness and revelry was created. This rabble of society, which was in power, was completely independent and did not take into account the central government at all. It was not uncommon when an order came from St. Petersburg to remove one of the commanders, and the replaced one not only did not obey the order, but also organized direct armed resistance to the officials who came to replace. As already mentioned, the indigenous tribes offered stubborn and long-term resistance to the newcomers, especially in this sense, the Tungus and Koryaks were different. This struggle further embittered the Russians, who cruelly took revenge on the foreigners. “The captured young men were forcibly baptized and, quite often, they were enslaved. The harassment and lawlessness perpetrated by the local authorities were so cruel that even the central government, as you know, not too responsive to the people's suffering, was forced to turn its attention to this and punish the most ferocious and arrogant administrators. The arbitrariness that reigned here in a corrupting manner acted on almost all Russians and Europeans who came to this land. Evidence documents say that nearly all expeditions that came here for scientific or commercial purposes were insolent and outrageous; so, for example, the officers of the famous Bering expedition, after whom the Bering Strait is named, broke into the houses of residents, beat and raped them, etc. Similar facts could be cited about the activities of the expedition of the historian Miller and others. Little by little, the Kamchatka Territory, like the rest of Siberia, it lost its independence and independence from the central Russian government. By the end of the first half of the last century, it was already just an area of ​​a colossal empire with the authorities appointed by the center. Russian capital made very little progress in using the enormous natural resources that the region has and which so whetted the appetites of the first Russian colonialists. The purchase of furs was carried out almost exclusively by the Americans, and it must be said that the predatory methods of fur trade, which they practiced, had a disastrous effect on the economy of the region and the life of the natives. At the beginning of the XIX century. buying up furs. the well-known Russian-American company was engaged; after its liquidation, the American firm Gutchinson, Kohl and Co. also became a monopoly in this area, then a certain Philippeus, an agent of another American firm. The Americans bought up valuable furs on the cheap, exchanging them for unnecessary trinkets, to which foreigners are so greedy, and especially for alcohol, which, with their light hand, is almost to this day the most terrible scourge of the natives. Alcoholism and syphilis are the gifts of Western civilization that were left to the Kamchatka natives in exchange for expensive furs by Russian administrators and American merchants. If the Americans seized into their own hands one of the most important branches of the economic life of the region, the fur trade, then another, no less important branch, the fishing industry, fell entirely into the hands of the Japanese. We have already pointed out the enormous importance for the region of fishing. There are huge fish resources here, to the exploitation of which both the Russian administration and private entrepreneurs paid very little attention. Thus, it was not difficult for Japanese capital to occupy a vacant place. By the era of World War II, the production of Japanese fisheries in this area reaches enormous proportions. Their main attention was paid to catching salmon species. Along with this, the catch of less valuable species also increased: herring, crabs, etc. To characterize and the ratio between the products of Russian and Japanese fisheries, we point out that in 1912 the catch of herring reached 36,680,500 pcs., Of which the share of the Japanese was 27,950,000 and the share of the Russians was 8,730,500. In the first years of the war, we see an increase in the Russian share in the catch, but since 1917, during the years of the civil war and devastation, the Japanese have become almost monopolists in this area. A number of side industries are developing: canning production, preparation of fertilizer fertilizers, caviar, salting fish, refrigeration, etc. Just like the Americans in the fur trade, the Japanese use predatory methods in fishing, which also have a disastrous effect on the lives of foreigners and at the same time damage the fish resources of these waters. Foreign firms, buying furs and fish at fabulously low prices, force the natives to constantly increase the amount of their catch; as a result, the death of rare and valuable animals, in particular, sable, beaver, silver fox, is observed, and the region faces the threat of their complete extinction in the near future. The October Revolution and the events that followed it found reflection in this remote, abandoned outskirts. From February to December 1917, power was in the hands of the interim government's henchmen. In December, Soviet power was established, which existed until July 1918. Since 1918, the Kamchatka-Chukotka Territory has become an arena for the activities of White Guard detachments cut off from Soviet Russia. Until 1920, Kolchak operated here, and then until 1923 he was replaced by Merkulov. During this period, local supporters of the Soviet government went underground, preparing an uprising. Only in 1923, that is, much later than other areas of our Union, Kamchatka was liberated from the White Guards and sovietized.