1. General outline of the country
Georgia is a fertile country. It is located on the southern slope of the Caucasus Range, which protects it from the cold northern currents. According to its characteristic features, Georgia can be divided into three different regions: firstly, Western Georgia - Imereti, occupying the basin of the Rion River and bordered by two ridges, the main Caucasian ridge and Suram (Lik), and from the west bounded by the Black Sea. River basin Rion, as it were, makes up a huge triangle, the two sides of which are mountain ranges, and the third is the sea. The climate in Western Georgia is warm subtropical, rainfall is abundant, and therefore it is covered everywhere with luxurious vegetation, from the very sea level, right down to the strip of eternal snow. The second region of Georgia is the upper basin of the Kura-Kartal'inia, which is separated from Western Georgia by the Lik mountain range and the Adjara-Akhaltsiysky mountains. In this region, the climate is less warm and the precipitation is less abundant, and therefore the flora does not amaze him as much as in Western Georgia. However, the vegetation is extremely rich here too. Beautiful maple, beech, coniferous forests cover the slopes of the mountains, vines, fruit trees, etc. grow in the valleys, etc. The third region is the Kakheti region, lying to the east of Kartalinia. It is extremely rich and in many ways resembles Western Georgia in its vegetation. All these areas are in close proximity to the main Caucasian ridge and currently serve as a center for the spread of the Georgian people. However, there were times when Georgian tribes inhabited areas lying far to the south, up to the Araks and even beyond. The past of the Georgian people goes back extremely far. The names of individual Georgian tribes are found in ancient Assyrian inscriptions and chronicles already one and a half thousand years BC, as well as in the Bible. However, the history of the Georgian tribes of these distant centuries is still shrouded in darkness. The only thing we can say with certainty is that the roots of Georgian culture go back to the so-called Kingdom of Van (1000-600 BC) and that the people who inhabited this kingdom, the Khaldi, are one of the constituent parts that created the modern Georgian nationality. Georgian history can be divided into three periods. The mythical period was reflected in the Georgian annals. In the latter, it is muffled about some kind of struggle waged by the founder of Georgia, Kartlos, with Nemrod, who apparently personified the Assyrians. Another period can be called an epic period, since the information about it reported by the Georgian chronicles (Kartlis Tskhovreba) is definitely epic in nature. This period lasts approximately from the IV century BC up to the Arab conquest (VII century AD). For this period, there is already sufficient information for Georgia, found in classical authors. The third period — the period after the Arab conquest — can rightfully be called the historical period. What kind of life and social order was typical for Georgia and the Georgian tribes of these different periods? For the first period, the mythical period, we have almost no data yet. In the second period, the period from the IV century BC, apparently, the patriarchal-tribal system prevailed at the beginning, which gradually in the first centuries of our era began to give way to the feudal system and life. The historical period up to the revolution of 1905 was characterized by a feudal system. Georgian feudalism reached its development in the XII and XIII centuries in the so-called era of Queen Tamara. After the Mongol conquest (XIII century), regress was definitely noticed in Georgia, and Georgian feudalism of subsequent centuries could be called decadent feudalism. However, this decadent feudalism, which led the country to complete fragmentation, continued until the 19th century, until Russian rule. The Russian government was afraid of large feudal lords, so it strongly supported the small landed nobility, which equalized in rights with the land magnates. Thus, the Russian government destroyed the feudal hierarchy and in its place left only two classes, the noble-landowner class, which owned land, and the Yrestyan class, deprived of independent land holdings. The feudal hierarchy ceased to exist under Russian rule, while the relationship between peasants and landowners continued to be purely feudal in nature, right up to the present day, until the revolution of 1905, and in survivals until the October Revolution. The peasant remained associated with a number of duties with the landowner, he did not own his own land plots, but cultivated only the landowner's land, giving the owner for the right to use a certain part of the harvest, called "tala" and sometimes making up a third or a quarter of the total harvest. True, in Western Georgia, excessively proliferating noble families often turned into purely peasant holdings in their land holdings, but along with this, medium and large landowners continued to exist. Georgia is a predominantly agricultural country; agriculture plays in it completely an exceptional role, and the industry is still very weak. Only the manganese mines of Western Georgia are of great importance, and not only all-Union, but also worldwide. The manufacturing industry (tobacco and textile factories, winemaking) is still underdeveloped. Only after carrying out large-scale electrification works in Georgia was the development of its natural resources ensured. As for the merchant class, oddly enough, the Georgians during their very long history did not single out one, especially in Eastern Georgia, and the merchants in general were represented by a foreign element, mainly Armenians. True, a significant part of the Armenian form class in Georgia settled a very long time ago, and therefore completely georgianized. Nevertheless, one cannot fail to note the phenomenon; that in; Until the 20th century, Georgia did not generally have a national trading class. This circumstance is extremely characteristic and it definitely indicates the role that the agricultural economy plays in Georgia, as well as the importance of the feudal system for Georgian life. The relationship between the feudal landlord and the peasant-farmer found an extremely vivid reflection in Georgian life and had a profound influence right up to our days, when the victorious revolution crushed all foundations. previous relationship. As for the proletariat, it is quantitatively small in Georgia. It is available only in a few centers and is represented mainly by transport workers. Thus, the most numerous category of workers is the workers of the Tiflis railway workshops. If we add to them some more workers employed in tobacco factories, Chiatura manganese mines and Tkvibul coal mines, several leather factories, as well as port workers in Batum and Poti, then we will get only 10-15 thousand workers for the whole of Georgia. But the small-scale trade and handicraft class of Georgia is much stronger. However, here it is necessary to repeat what has just been said — the trade and handicraft class of the most important centers of Eastern Georgia, primarily in Tiflis, consists of more than half of Armenians, although to a large extent they have become Georgian and adopted the Georgian way of life. These are, in general, the class divisions of modern Georgia, or rather, pre-revolutionary Georgia. Turning to the position of a woman, it should be pointed out that in general, in most of Georgia, a Georgian woman seems to be completely free and equal to a man. Unlike other eastern countries, it is not constrained by everyday life or custom. However, this is not true for all regions of Georgia, and above all, the regions populated by Georgians professing Islam are an exception. These, by the way, include Ajaristan, and some areas that have become part of Turkey. The life of some corners of Georgia, lost in the depths of the main Caucasian ridge, where old traditions have been preserved in full force and where the position of a woman is influenced by customs dating back to the deepest antiquity, seems to be very characteristic. In these corners you can find the remnants of everyday life dating back to the deepest past in which there was no individual marriage, such, for example, the corner is Svane-tmya, inhabited, however, not by Georgians, but by the Svans, kindred to Georgians. it is located between two parallel ridges: the main Caucasian ridge, which reaches its largest here! heights, and the Latparsky ridge parallel to it. Svaneti lies in the middle of these two ridges. It is extremely difficult to get into it, since the snow makes the passes of the Latparsky ridge impassable for eight months a year. As for the passes of the main Caucasian ridge, they can be used only in July and August. Svaneti, which is difficult to access, from the artistic point of view, seems to be an exceptional beauty spot, especially when you look at it from the top of the Latpar ridge. Then the gorges of Svaneti stand in front of the beholder at a glance. Below, along the rapid course of the Ingur River, there are marvelous forests that rise up to the Alpine strip. Then a black, completely bare rocky ridge, stretching down to a strip of eternal snow and cut only by glaciers descending from the main massif of the main ridge, and then a huge white wall of eternal snow with huge snow plains rises, on which individual peaks rise. In the morning, at sunrise, the picture becomes completely fabulous. At first, individual peaks turn pink, and the main mass of snow remains bluish-white until * the moment when the sun's rays do not illuminate individual gorges. Svaneti is a fabulous country, but life in this fabulous country is extremely difficult, which left its mark on the inhabitants. In general, they are gloomy and inhospitable. In addition, they constantly 'had to defend their existence from all kinds of attacks, and' the Svan villages present a very special picture. Approximately, each of the three houses has a tall, tapering tower topped with a quadrangular ledge. This tower is divided into floors, which are communicate with each other using holes made in the floor and portable wooden ladders. In addition, some of the villages of the so-called Free Svaneti (in contrast to the Princely Svaneti) are surrounded by a special wall. At present, the Svans represent only a remnant of the once vast ethnic group, akin to the Georgians and driven into inaccessible mountains; as we will see later, they preserved a special way of life, which affected the position of women. Another extremely difficult-to-reach corner of Georgia is Khevsureti, lying far to the east to the north of Tiflis. Get in! in Khevsureti, as well as in Svaneti, it is extremely difficult. Only mountain paths, cut by horse hooves in the rocks, going over deep abysses, lead to Khevsurst. It is almost impossible for a person not accustomed to mountain travel to get to Khevsureti. The newcomer is especially horrified by the bridges thrown over mountain streams that have dug deep gorges, often reaching depths of up to 100 sazhens, and 20-30 fathoms wide. These bridges are usually made of parallel logs, on which boards are crushed. These boards are attached to the logs with a vine through specially made holes. Often, when the abyss over which the bridge is thrown is wide enough, each of the parallel sides consists of two logs fastened together in an equally primitive way. When a rider enters such a bridge, the logs begin to sway, and each board begins to dance under the horse's feet, and all this is over the abyss 100 yards deep. It is absolutely impossible for beginners to find their way on the paths of Khevsureti. During my first trip to Khevsureti, I somehow drove far ahead of my companions along a path that wound over huge abysses along the slope of an almost sheer cliff. To my horror, at one of the turns, I saw the Khevsurs driving towards me. I had no idea how to turn, the Khevsurs who were driving towards me were shouting something, when they were convinced that I did not understand them and were completely confused, then each of the riders stood with one foot on the saddle, raised the other as high as possible, leaning on the rock , then he reared the horse, held it under his foot and thus turned, having done all the ego over the bottomless abyss; then the whole cavalcade descended to a wider place, where it let me and my companions pass. It is in such inaccessible areas that the Khevsurs live. Khevsur villages also present an extremely interesting picture. Khevsureti is almost completely devoid of flat places, and therefore its villages are molded along the slopes of the mountains with a number of floors. The roof of the lowest hut (sakli) serves as a courtyard for the hut located above, and with such steps the village sometimes goes up to a large elevation. sotu, seven-eight-nine steps. Khevsureti is an extremely poor country, its inhabitants are mainly engaged in cattle breeding, but nevertheless; the Khevsurs are extremely welcoming and hospitable. ' However, despite the cordiality and hospitality, the Khevsurs retained quite a few barbaric customs (as well as the Svans), among other things, the custom of bloody revenge. Therefore, in Khevsureti one can sometimes see a very curious picture: the Khevsur is cultivating his field fully armed, the weapon of the Khevsur is "extremely primitive and consists, or rather consisted" more recently of chain mail, helmet, sword, as well as an archaic flintlock rifle with a tiny butt and with a long barrel ... A shot from such a gun will certainly knock an unusual person off his feet x) Pshavia and the area inhabited by carcasses seem to be the same bearish angles. For the latter, it must be pointed out that they predominantly retained a typical 'nomadic way of life: the carcasses annually drive their herds over great distances up to Turkey. In this respect, this phenomenon seems to be extremely characteristic. In Georgia, cattle breeding plays an important role in many regions, however, almost everywhere, it still plays an auxiliary role and has lost the character of a nomadic economy. The Tushins in this case are an exception. Needless to say, in all the indicated regions of Svaneti, Khevsureti, Pshavia and Tusheti, a lot of ancient customs and beliefs have been preserved. Christianity has touched these areas very superficially, and under a slight touch it is easy to discern the pagan basis of different beliefs. This circumstance seems all the more remarkable since Georgia adopted Christianity already in the 4th century. ad. True, at the present time, among Georgians, like among Armenians, religion has receded into the background and is most likely a matter of habit. Nevertheless, it should be noted that in various hard-to-reach areas, Christianity could not even break the more ancient beliefs. In this respect, Islam, adopted in some Georgian regions, had a much deeper effect and, by the way, religious fanaticism can be found only in Muslim Georgia. Before the Russian rule, Georgia had an independent church organization headed by a Catholic (patriarch). The Russian government destroyed the Georgian independent organization and subordinated the Georgian Church to the synod, which always caused extreme discontent in certain Georgian circles. After the revolution of 1917, the Georgian church I regained independence, autocephaly. Oddly enough, the idea of ​​an independent church organization was especially strongly worn in 17-21, not by the clergy, but by the Georgian Mensheviks. As for the Georgian peasant economy, its distinctive feature is little land. Land plots are especially small in Western Georgia (Imeretin), where the population is relatively extremely dense, up to 50 people. per sq. verst, and the percentage of the urban population is no more than 15о / о of the total population. In Central Georgia, Kartalinii and Kakheti, the land plots are somewhat larger, but nevertheless they are completely insufficient, and therefore everywhere there is a striving for intensive crops, which, moreover, are extremely favored by natural conditions. Horticulture and viticulture are widespread in Georgia. In some areas, they are engaged in cotton growing, as well as the cultivation of exotic crops (tea bush, laurel cherry, etc.). Arable farming 'gained considerable dimensions in Kartalinia. In Western Georgia (Imeretin), they are mainly engaged in the cultivation of corn. In the mountainous regions and in Tusheti, cattle breeding is of great importance. The difference in the peasant economy did not specifically affect the position of the Georgian woman. Everywhere in the cultural regions of Georgia, she enjoys complete freedom in legal and domestic terms. Her main occupation is, of course, the household. The Georgian woman takes only an insignificant part in heavy agricultural work, and often in the fields you can find women and girls working in gloves. Until very recently, before the revolution, the Georgian social system and the strict demarcation of the rural population of Georgia into two hostile classes: landlords and peasants, exerted a much greater influence on the position of women. However, the victorious revolution, which crushed the landlord rule, destroyed this influence. The history of the Georgian social and revolutionary movement over the past fifty years is presented in general terms as follows: in Georgia the class division was manifested extremely clearly, especially in the countryside. Agrarian movements were observed in Georgia throughout the 19th century. In the first decades of Russian domination, and also soon after the end of the Crimean campaign, these unrest reached particular intensity in western Georgia — in Mingrelia. However, these movements were predominantly spontaneous. They were realized only in the 90s. last century under the influence of the Marxist! teachings. The idea of ​​the class struggle was extremely easily assimilated by the Georgian peasants, and therefore, strange as it may seem at first glance, the social democratic movement took deep roots in the Georgian peasantry, and very quickly (especially after the revolution of 1905-6) showed petty-bourgeois tendencies. This phenomenon is quite understandable. The proletariat in Georgia is very weak. Its intelligentsia consists mainly of commoners and small-scale nobles. The contradictions that were observed in the countryside and were definitely reduced to the struggle between the landowners and peasants led to the rapid spread of the idea of ​​the class struggle. At the same time, the Georgian city, inhabited largely by artisans and small traders, experienced an acute crisis, namely the transition from a semi-medieval guild to a capitalist economy. This transition had a very difficult impact on the handicraft and small-scale merchant urban population, and therefore the revolutionary slogans of 1905 spread easily in it. primarily against the police autocracy that takes care of it. However, the sources of this hatred of capitalism here were different from those of the organized proletariat, which was fully revealed after the fall of the autocracy, when power in Georgia passed into the hands of the party, which at that time enjoyed the greatest influence among the population as a result of its revolutionary activities in 1905. to the Mensheviks. From the moment when the Georgian Mensheviks were given the opportunity to pursue their policy freely, it became clear that, despite all the socialist slogans they once put forward, they turned out to be first and foremost ardent nationalists. The Georgian Mensheviks began with a nationalist policy and with the persecution of various national minorities, Armenians, Russians, Ossetians, etc. The nationalist policy of the Georgian Mensheviks led to a series of bloody clashes, as well as to a certain currying favor with the imperialists. In 1918, the Georgian Mensheviks, first of all, under the auspices of German imperialism, showed themselves to be Germanophiles, that is, ardent supporters of imperialist Germany, despite the fact that before the February revolution of 1917, the leaders of the Georgian Mensheviks, Noy Zhordania, Chkheidze, Yevgeny Gegechkori, were distinguished by their defensist tendencies. Germanophilism of the Georgian Mensh After the defeat of Germany, the Eviks did not prevent them from showing ardent sympathy for the Entente, in particular for Great Britain, which for a short time occupied the entire Transcaucasia. In the area of ​​social construction, the Georgian Mensheviks provided the greatest patronage to local capitalist groups, and therefore their economic policy was strictly protectionist (that is, patronizing the native bourgeoisie). The tendencies manifested by the Mensheviks cannot surprise the attentive observer, since in essence in Georgia the Mensheviks have always relied on the bourgeois urban masses and on the peasantry. The absence of large proletarian masses led to the triumph of the petty-bourgeois nationalist policy in Georgia. The Georgian Mensheviks ruled Georgia for four years in 1917-1921. The fall of the Menshevik regime took place in February 1921.