1 General outline of the Adyghe-Circassian Autonomous Region
Since time immemorial, the Caucasus has been inhabited by freedom-loving and warlike mountain tribes, who have preserved their peculiar everyday and socio-economic order for millennia. One of such tribes in the North Caucasus are the Circassians-Adyge. Before the Caucasian wars, the Circassian tribes lived in the northern part of the Black Sea coast, spreading their possessions far to the east up to Chechnya. Historians believe that all the Circassian tribes at that time numbered up to two million people. According to their political structure, the Circassian tribes were divided into two groups: aristocratic and democratic. The first group had princes who ruled the tribes through the nobles. The second group had no princes; government and court here were in the hands of the people themselves, who elected elders and judges and gave them power. In the hands of these elected rulers, the court and the decision of important national issues were concentrated, such as war, peace, the performance of public works, etc. In their decisions they were guided by the norms of "adat" x), later d) Adat - customary law, a set of folk customs and popular legal practice in all spheres of public life, Muslim religious law was added to it. The existence of two different tribal groups of the Circassian people with different political organization, aristocratic and democratic, led to constant internecine wars among the Circassians. This circumstance prevented their unification into one state, capable of opposing itself to a common enemy and played an important role in the final defeat of the Circassians by Russian troops. The Circassians lived in auls. Mutual wear in the family was built on the basis of patriarchy. The father is the unlimited lord and master of the family. The place and rights of the deceased father pass to the eldest son. The head of the house gives instructions and disposes of the household. The rest of the members obey his will implicitly. Women and men live in a Circassian family completely isolated. Only unmarried sons of the owner and relatives close to the family can visit the main saklya, where women are in the daytime. It was considered indecent for the owner of the house or his married sons to appear there. The position of the daughter-in-law in the Circassian family attracts attention with its originality. She does not show herself to her father-in-law all her life, calls all family members by fictitious pet names and the like. According to historians, the Circassians have professed the Christian religion since the 6th century AD. Since the 18th century, the Turkish sultans have implanted the Mohammedan religion among them.In the conditions of the meager, mountainous nature, the mental powers of the Circassians, in general, were far from poor, were directed almost exclusively to military affairs and to satisfy the urgent needs of life. The Circassians did not eat their writing and sleep appeared only since 1917. Their societies were permeated with ordinary principles. One of the typical mountain customs is, for example, the custom of hospitality, which has existed since time immemorial. It arose out of the ancestor cult. Feeding at the hearth, the souls of the ancestors by their constant presence around it, give it a special holiness. This nature of the hearth also explains the fact that any stranger who comes into contact with it (for which it is considered sufficient to cross the threshold of the sakli, or taste the food cooked on the hearth), becomes a temporary member of the family and has the right to count on its help and protection. Circassians have a custom according to which the elders are respected. The respect of the younger for the elders is expressed in the fact that in the presence of the latter, the younger stand until they receive an invitation to sit down. The elders eat first, then the younger. If two are walking, the elder is on the right side, the younger on the left. Any old man without ceremony demands services from any young man and he is obliged to perform without any rebellion. Among the Circassians there was a clan institution of bloody revenge, when the murder or major insult of a member of one clan caused revenge on the part of members of another clan. It is widely believed that the Cherkassians were exclusively engaged in robberies, robberies and predation. There is nothing more wrong with this view. The economy and well-being of the people was based on productive agricultural labor, and not on robberies and raids. The Circassians were also engaged in crafts: blacksmith, carpentry, saddlery; The art of decorating weapons was considered a particularly noble occupation. In the struggle of the Caucasian mountaineers for their independence with the Russian conquerors, the Circassians were the last to fall. This unequal 'bloody heroic struggle of the Circassians with a foreign yoke lasted too sixty years. It was not without reason that it provoked the historical words of Karl Marx in the 40s of the last century: “The brave Circassians again inflicted several serious defeats on the Russians. Nations, learn from them what people who want to remain free are capable of. ”In 1864, the Circassians were finally broken and subordinated to Russia, and after the victory the tsarist government adopted a number of repressive measures against the Circassians. Defeated and driven out by Russian troops from their native villages, the Circassians were forced to leave their homeland and move to other lands. A number of Circassian tribes were completely expelled to Turkey; at the same time, the expulsion was provided with such conditions that a huge part of the population perished in the Caucasus mountains from hunger and cold. The evicted did not even have the opportunity to seize their belongings and the most valuable property was buried in the ground, while their sakli were burned. The chain of burial mounds that covered the path of the evicted Circassians to the shores of the Black Sea testified to the suffering experienced by the Circassian settlers. A smaller part of the Circassian population submitted to Russia and was resettled to the plain along the Kuban and Laba rivers. The fate of the Circassians who remained in their homeland was little better than the fate of those who left: abuse, insults and mockery of the exhausted people — they all had to endure along with hardships and various diseases caused by their inability to adapt to the new unhealthy swampy area. Then, as in the entire Caucasus, the tsarist government found a loyal support among the Circassians c. the face of the privileged classes, which, in turn, exploited the lower classes. The laboring agricultural mass of the population locked itself in a shell of failure, persistently ignored the Russian language, Russian customs and Russian customs. National alienation and fear of everything Russian developed. The exceptional strength of the oppression of the tsarist government with its russification policy could not fail to dull the national and political instinct of the Circassians. There was no longer the freedom-loving and warlike Circassian, sung in folk tales; there was a Circassian labor mass and the upper classes in the person of the privileged nobles and princes. It was not for nothing that when the February revolution broke out, this aristocratic-intellectual elite used the masses to direct them against the Bolsheviks, and later with the white generals, against Soviet power. Soon, however, a healthy instinct predicted to the masses that the business of the generals and the nobility was not their business. The Circassians began to defect from the White Army, often forming partisan detachments that waged a war with the White Guards. The Soviet power that came to the Kuban and was finally established here in 1920, proceeding from the principles of protecting small nationalities, takes on the organization of the Circassians: a special commissariat for affairs is organized under the Kubcherrevkom. highlanders, then renamed the mountain section. The latter begins organizational work among the population. In this regard, Circassian congresses are convened to discuss issues related to the formation of Autonomy. The Adyghe-Cherkess Autonomous Region was formed on July 27, 1922 from a part of the former Kuban Region. The region is located in a narrow strip from 10 to 30 versts in width along the left bank of the Kuban and Laba rivers, occupying 276.626 dessiatines or 2.655 sq. versts with a population of 114,570 people. If we remember that the possessions of the Circassians before the Caucasian wars stretched from the shores of the Black Sea to mountainous Chechnya, that their number reached two million people, we are faced with a vivid picture of the tragic path along which the Circassian people passed. The stretching territory of the region is interrupted by numerous rivers originating in the mountains and foothills of the Caucasus. Some of them flow into the Laba River, some into the Kuban. Along with this, a number of small rivers, before reaching the Kuban, form extensive floodplains, which dry up only in autumn, and are covered with water during the rest of the year. The water that got into the floodplains lingers here for too long, having no flow towards the Kuban due to the presence of the coastal barrier formed by the muddy deposit of the Kuban. All this puts a definite imprint on the nature of the soil, vegetation and climate of the oblast, and, consequently, on the occupations of the population. At the same time, this circumstance makes the region one of the largest foci of malaria. The communication routes in the region are mainly country roads; in winter, in the rainy season, a riding horse becomes the only reliable means of transportation. The administrative center of the region is located in the city of Krasnodar, which is not part of the Autonomous Region. There are no urban areas in the region. Administratively, Adygea is divided into five districts. According to soil, climatic and economic conditions, it is customary to divide it into three regions: zapatny, central and southeastern. The central region is predominantly agricultural (and economically the most powerful region. It is also concentrated here, mainly, the Russian part of the population. Economically less well-off is the western region, where the population has long been engaged mainly in extensive cattle breeding. Soil and climatic conditions for grain crops here are less favorable. Hence the lack of bread, which prompts the population to look for subsidiary earnings; this also led to the development of handicraft industries in this area on a small scale - the manufacture of cloth Circassian women are mainly engaged in making them, and the cloaks are remarkable for their quality. ate in other areas. In the southeastern region of the region, due to the remoteness from the markets and the mountainous relief of the surface, the population is mainly engaged in primitive animal husbandry. A special type of Circassian cattle has been preserved here! with valuable dairy qualities. The main source of economic well-being of the population is agriculture. The distribution of land by land within the region presents the following picture (in ° / o ° / o): under settlements 3.6, under arable land 38.8, forests and shrubs 9.3, hayfields - 10.7, pastures - 15.3 and uncomfortable land - 22.5. The main agricultural crops in the region are wheat, sunflower, corn, potatoes and tobacco, and tobacco is not the last in the country's economy. Recently, attempts have been made to instill in the peasant economy the culture of kenaf as a plant that can replace jute for the preparation of coarse sack fabrics. Since ancient times, the Circassians were engaged in cattle breeding, and mainly horse breeding. Circassian horses, huge herds of which roamed the Kuban steppes, were famous not only in the Caucasus, but also far beyond its borders. The total number of head of livestock in the region, which in 1914 was 236.355 (including 46.600 horses and 63.0С0 cattle), decreased in 1922 thanks to the imperialist and civil wars, to 124.450, but by 1925 it again increased to 9Оо / о pre-war figures. The factory-type manufacturing industry in the region is in its infancy. The first place in it belongs to the milling industry; then comes the tannery and oil mill. The timber industry serves only local needs, whereas with the correct formulation of business, forestry production! can serve as one of the lucrative sources of the region. It is especially necessary to note the achievements of the Soviet government in the educational work of the Circassian population. Everyone knows the tsarist policy of the pre-revolutionary period in the education of national minorities. This policy was aimed mainly at keeping the nationalities in darkness and ignorance, setting them against each other and building their well-being on this. Such a policy could not lead the Circassians to enlightenment, and by 1914 the number of literates barely reached 3%. Only the October Revolution made it possible) to begin the work of enlightening the population. In 1925, there (instead of the previous 12 schools (with a Russification bias, which the laboring mass was alienated from) with a total number of students in 4C0 souls, there were already about 100 schools with about 7.0C0 boys and girls. Every year the number of schools and number of students is increasing.Many schools are working on new programs.Increased attention is paid to the social and political education of children.