I. Geographic and economic outline of Dagestan
The Dagestan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic is located in the north-eastern part of the Caucasus. In the north, it borders on the Kalmyk Autonomous Region; in the northwest - with the Tersk district; in the south, with the Azerbaijan Soviet Republic, and in the southwest, with the Georgian Soviet Republic. The western border of the Dagestan Republic is the Chechen Autonomous Region, and the eastern border is the Caspian Sea. The territory of Dagestan within its modern borders covers an area of ​​more than five million dessiatines. If we could look at the whole of Dagestan from a very great height, then our eyes would see an extremely mountainous area in the form of endless labyrinths of mountain ranges with snowy, pointed peaks, with turbulent river flows flowing in very deep and narrow gorges. In this respect, the very name "Dagestan", which means "Country g! Or", is very indicative. Almost the ZD of Dagestan proper (within the pre-war borders) is covered with mountains. Thus, we see that this country is one of the most mountainous areas in the whole world. Naturally, with such a surface arrangement, there is very little land suitable for arable farming, and a Dagestani often accounts for tenths of a tithe. Only the flat strip along the Caspian Sea, together with the recently annexed Northern strip (Kizlyar and Kara-Nogai steppes) are more or less convenient for farming areas. Administratively, the Dagestan Republic is divided into 14 districts and districts (according to data for 1926). The commercial, industrial and cultural center of the Dagestan Republic is the city of Makhach-Kala (formerly Petrovsk-Port), located on the only railroad so far. Located on the shores of the Caspian Sea, Makhach-Kala has a well-equipped seaport. The population of Dagestan, according to the 1926 census, is 825,775 people of both sexes. Ethnographically, this population is an extremely variegated picture. It is difficult to find in the whole world such a corner as Dagestan, where on a small, relatively 'territory, there would be so many peoples with different languages, as well as tribal and everyday characteristics. The number of tribes reaches twenty. The number of adverbs is over thirty. The most numerous tribe are the Avars, or "Maarulal", numbering over 180,000 people. The second largest tribe is the Kyurintsy, or as they are also called "Lezgins", numbering about 140,000 people. The third place is occupied by the Dargins, numbering 130,000 people. Then there are the Turkic tribes of 120,000 people of both sexes. As inhabitants of the plain, they are the more cultural part of the population. In terms of numbers among the large tribes, the Laks, or Kazi-Kumukhs, numbering only 60,000 people, occupy last place. Dagestan is even more diverse from the linguistic side. Suffice it to say that the ancient writers called it "The Mountain of Languages". And indeed, here we meet with the so-called "one-village languages" completely isolated from everyone around them, incomprehensible outside of their insignificant territory. Among the languages ​​of Dagestan, the following five are considered the main ones: 1) Avar, 2) Dargin, 3) the language of the Kumyks-Turks, 4 Kyurin or Lezghin, 5) Lak. The Avar language plays the role of the language of intertribal relations in the northwestern part of the 'highland Dagestan, and partly in the flat Dagestan. On the contrary, the dominant language among the inhabitants of the plains and southern Dagestan is the Kumyk-Turkic language. The main occupations of the population are agriculture and cattle breeding (especially sheep breeding). Dagestan suffers from an exceptional land shortage: at the cost of inhuman efforts, the mountaineer has to artificially create plots of arable land only a few dozen fathoms long and several arshins wide on the steep slopes of the mountains. In highland Dagestan, a similar "terrace culture" is widespread, with fields rising in ledges from the foot of the mountain upward. To these artificial terraces, the mountaineers, with great difficulty, sometimes at a distance of 10-15 and more versts, lead water along a groove cut in the rock, thus turning them into irrigated arable fields and orchards. The methods of cultivating the land (especially the upland part) are very simple and are carried out with extremely primitive agricultural tools. In agriculture, in the first place are grain crops — corn, rye and wheat. The individual form of land use prevails. Dagestan's harvest is enough for only a few months, the rest of the time the population feeds on imported bread, mainly corn from Chechnya, the granary of Dagestan. In case of land hunger and in the presence of mountain pastures, of course, cattle breeding is destined to play a major role in agriculture in Dagestan, and it does constitute an important source of income for the highlander's poor budget. 'Cattle breeding is closely related to the peculiarities of the nature of Dagestan and is predominantly nomadic. In summer, cattle graze on high mountain pastures, and in the winter months We are ferried to the low-lying shores of the Caspian Sea. Finally, there are areas with a developed handicraft industry. Chi-'elo handicraftsmen reach up to 100,000 people. This includes carpet, cloth, drills, metalworking, pottery and a number of other industries. The first three branches of the handicraft industry employ exclusively women (up to 25,000 people). The Kuban and the auls closest to it in southern Dagestan have long been famous for metal processing. Kubachians are excellent goldsmiths - goldsmiths. Copper utensils are made of varnishes, as well as jewelry. Silver and gold varnish products are sold far beyond the borders of the USSR. The village of Untsukul, Avar district, is known for wood and bone products with inlay. His canes in peacetime5 found a market for themselves even in America. So, we see that the extreme insecurity of land forces the highlander to engage in a wide variety of crafts in order to maintain his miserable existence. In addition, in search of earnings, the mountaineers annually go by tens of thousands to latrine trades in different areas of the Caucasus and Russia.

2. Past and present of Dagestan
Almost the entire social life of Dagestan rests on two foundations: on Sharia, that is, the laws of Islam (the religion of Muslims) and customary law, called "adat" in the Caucasus. The roots of "adat" lie in pre-Muslim forms of society in Dagestan, which were clearly generic in nature. The clan life, conditioned by the unity of the clan economy, was built on strict discipline and unconditional obedience to the elders of the clan (patriarchy). In contrast, the Sharia, which is an attempt to regulate relationships with the help of the commandments and interpretations of the Qur'an by Muslim lawyers, is built on the principles of not clan, but personal property. Since the tribal economy disintegrated and the family became the main economic unit, it is understandable that the prevailing significance that the Shari'ah received over the adat is understandable. Despite, however, this fact - a number of adat survivals, especially in the way of life, retained their influence among the highlanders - and we are faced, for example, with the custom of blood feud, one of the most striking manifestations of ancestral laws. life of the Muslim peoples of the USSR During the October Revolution, the adat still retains a certain influence among the Dagestan tribes. During the struggle of the scattered and diverse peoples of Dagestan against such a powerful enemy as Tsarist Russia / Islam played a major role, 'uniting the separating the tribes into a powerful religious union. The struggle for independence, for freedom, merged with the struggle of religion, the desire to improve economic conditions took on, like all backward peoples, a religious coloration. At the same time, there was a struggle against the "internal" enemies of the people — the khans, who had turned into despots who, with impunity, trampled on all the laws of adat and sharia of the peoples under their control. The clergy were even indignant at the usurpation and the seizure of their rights over the “flock” by the khans. In short, the internal situation in Dagestan was such that any call to fight against the power of the khans could find a response in the hearts of the masses. And in such a situation, the clergy acts as a defender of the oppressed and a fighter for the national independence of the Dagestan peoples during the Caucasian wars. The harsh word "ghazavat" *) became the battle cry of the mountaineers. The Muslim spiritual intelligentsia led the half-century struggle with Russia. She spread something like the following proclamation: “Muslims cannot be anyone's slaves and cannot pay taxes to anyone. Equality should exist between all Muslims, for Muslims the first thing is ghazavat (holy war with the infidels), and then the implementation of Sharia; fulfilling sharia is not salvation. Whoever fulfills the Sharia must first of all arm himself at all costs, abandon his family, home and not spare life itself, "etc. During this period of struggle, the mountaineers put forward such historical names as Gazi-Muhamed and Shamil from their midst. The memory of the heroic deeds of their national leaders is still alive among the people. The authority of the clergy in this era rose to an unattainable height. Even after the final conquest of Dagestan by Russia (1860), the clergy continued to offer passive resistance to the Russification measures of the tsarist government, opposing the Arab education to the Russian. The Arabic language in Dagestan played approximately the same role as Latin in its time in Western Europe. Suffice it to say that the official correspondence in the aul offices was conducted exclusively in Arabic. The attempt of the governor of the Caucasus in 1912 to introduce Russian office work instead of the Arab one was completely defeated. But if Islam was to some extent a progressive factor for the historical situation that was discussed a little higher, then for our time it is a big brake that prevents Soviet culture from penetrating into the dark corners of Dagestan not yet touched by secular sciences. Fight against st Russia still tried to pursue a colonialist policy here. So, for example, in flat Dagestan, Russian villages began to appear one after another. As for the mountainous Dagestan, then it was also meant to populate the village of Gunib with Russians, where Shamil was taken prisoner. And only the absence of those willing among the Russians prevented the implementation of this plan. In the field of public education, they strove to ensure that officials from the highlanders graduated from the Russian school were ready to serve faithfully the Tsar and the Fatherland. There was no question of creating cultural forces that could bring real benefits to their dark people. In general, the Russian school did not enjoy the trust of the broad masses of the people. Only children of service officials, nobles and officers went there. It is clear that the oppressors of their own people emerged from them. Any manifestation of national identity was suppressed by brute force. It was not allowed to publish anything about its national heroes, for tsarism was afraid that such publications might inflame the spirit of independence in the highlanders, which was already highly developed. So, for example, the history of the heroic struggle against tsarist Russia was not allowed to print by the censor. It was only under Soviet power in 1926 that this book came out of print in Russian translation under the title "Three Imams" 1). ** By the time of the February Revolution in Dagestan, the following main groups were outlined: a) Clerical landowners (Pan-Islamist), b) National (Independents), c) Agricultural workers (socialist). In the absence of a large local bourgeoisie, and therefore of the proletariat, the class struggle in Dagestan was of an underdeveloped, hidden nature, especially since the peasantry was almost not affected by capitalist development. In 1917, when the February Revolution broke out, the entire intelligentsia was seized with a revolutionary impulse under the slogan of a republic, a constituent assembly and self-determination of nationalities. But when the wave of the October Revolution reached Dagestan, two trends emerged among the intelligentsia — the Bolshevik and the Menshevik. For a long time only peaceful competition took place between them. The clergy, headed by Gotsinsky, along with the officers and bureaucracy joined the Mensheviks. Gotsinsky openly launched counter-revolutionary propaganda among the people. Yes. The inevitability of an armed conflict became obvious. And, indeed, a civil war soon began with the transfer of power from hand to hand, until Colonel Vicherakhov (hire the British) with his Cossack detachment, and behind him the Turks, established their temporary domination in Dagestan. The Turks were followed by the British and the Denikinites they supported. In March 1920, the victorious Red Army put an end to the domination of Denikin's army. The leader of the civil war in the mountains in 1920-21, Comrade. Samursky describes the coup in the minds of the highlanders as a result of the civil war: “The deception of Imam Gotsinsky, who, with a call for the protection of Islam, brought the highlanders into slavery to the White Guards, the robbery and terror of Turkish adventurers operating under the flag of Pan-Turkism, the transition of Dagestan officers and landowners to the side of Denikin and the fierce struggle against this very Denikin, on whose side the "respectable people" (that is, the landlords, officers and kulaks) took the side - all this clarified the consciousness of the Dagestani highlanders, made them understand the essence of the class struggle and roared towards class stratification. Under the pressure of the wave of revolution, patriarchal-tribal life cracked and began to slowly fall apart. The absolute authority of the clergy, elders, "respectable people" was questioned. The youth and the poor raised their heads and felt themselves entitled to act independently in the name of their class interests. The Red partisans of 1919-1920 already quite deliberately marched under the slogan “all power to the Soviets.” The turning point in the political, social and cultural life of Dagestan was the establishment of Soviet power. At the end of 1920, Dagestan was proclaimed the Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic oh, part of the RSFSR. The correct national policy of the Soviet government made a revolution in the cultural life of the country: textbooks for elementary schools were published in the main local languages, newspapers, popular science and political literature were published. Before the establishment of Soviet power, Dagestan did not have its own teaching staff, since teaching was conducted in Russian. At present, thanks to the efforts of the Dagestan People's Commissariat for Education, Dagestan is provided with teachers with pedagogical training sufficient for the initial work. Began to a systematic study of the region. Several scientific expeditions work every year; a Dagestan museum was created with a state scientific library. The Scientific Research Institute was also organized. The state apparatus is gradually being nationalized; the party organization, in spite of very unfavorable local conditions, is making notable successes. The country's economic well-being is gradually improving. Industrial centers are being created, where the mountaineers-workers receive the proletarian temper. Such enterprises are the mechanized plant "Dagestanskie Ogni" near Der-Bant, the III International (coarse) factory in Ma-khach-Kala and fisheries in the Caspian Sea. The population takes an active part in the economic construction of the country (the construction of a grandiose irrigation canal named after the October Revolution on its own). Thus, we are witnessing a great upsurge in the cultural and economic life of Dagestan over a significant period of time. The power of the khans was destroyed by the prince. In the aul, there is a class stratification: the poor are beginning to realize their class interests. The old way of life is already shaken. The youth is clearly moving towards the Soviet government. The woman sympathizes with the new way of life. The Soviet school attracts young people, and cooperatives take root.