1. General outline of the TSSR
Turkmen Owl Social The republic or Turkmenistan is one of the six republics that make up the USSR. It occupies the southwestern part of our Central Asia and is bordered in the north by the Autonomous Kazan Sov. Social Republic and Autonomous Karakalpak Region, in the east - from the Uzbek Sov. Social The republic, in the south, with Afghanistan and Persia, and in the west, its shores are washed by the waters of the Caspian Sea. In terms of its size, the TSSR is equal to 4, / 5 of the surface of France, with an area of ​​435 thousand square meters. km., while its population reaches barely one million people.Turkmenistan lies in the southwestern corner of the vast Turan lowland, stretching east of the Caspian Sea, then forming the boundless Kyrgyz steppes and further passing into the steppes of southern Siberia. Only in the south-west and along the southern edge of Turkmenistan are relatively low mountains, and the rest of the country is filled with sandy and clay deserts and steppes and salt marshes. Sandy deserts occupy slightly less than three quarters of the entire surface of Turkmenistan. The desert does not have the same appearance everywhere, the most characteristic places are covered with moving sandy sands. From a distance they resemble the sea with the waves frozen in motion. At the slightest wind, the sand begins to smoke and move. The moving sands, during their continuous wandering, sometimes covered entire villages, cities and populated areas. Sometimes the desert is filled with sandy hillocks or ridges parallel to each other, but unlike dunes, these sands are more or less fastened together by a kind of desert vegetation: saxaul, thorns, tamarisk and other plants that are unpretentious in terms of moisture. In many places, especially in the southeast, there are sandy steppes. During the two spring months, they are decorated with a lush carpet of bright wildflowers, and during the rest of the year they are barren plains, covered with burnt yellow grass and partly only with more hardy plants, like thorns, etc. But in some places the desert bursts in here, even in its own the most dead form — in the form of dunes. In the center of the TSSR, there are the famous Kara-Kum sands, which filled the entire inner part of the country, stretching for several hundred kilometers from west to east. In sharp contrast to the deserts are the so-called oases, places that have enough water and in which sedentary life is concentrated. After many days of traveling through the dead, waterless sandy desert with rare Turkmen nomads scattered near the wells, the oasis with the greenery of its gardens and fields, the waters of rivers and canals and a dense sedentary population makes an exceptionally strong impression. Of the large rivers, there is only Amu-Darya, and even that is located at the eastern border of the republic; in the west, the river, bordering with Persia, flows into the Caspian Sea. Atrek; the rivers Tejen and Mur-gab flow from south to north, but they and their tributaries are full only in spring, and in summer they almost completely dry up. The population [image of map] in the absence of more, has to be content with the water of these rivers and mountain streams, where they are. The situation is bad with drinking water inside the country: there are few wells, they often have tasteless, salty and unhealthy water, at the same time, little precipitation (rain and snow) falls, especially in the desert and steppe inland regions, as a result of which nomadic livestock can stay on the grazing in the winter. The country's climate is affected, on the one hand, by its southern position (the southernmost point of Turkmenistan is at the same time the southernmost point of the USSR), and, on the other, by its internal position on the mainland; as a result, the temperature fluctuates sharply. Vegetation depends only on irrigation, and with sufficient moisture it is very rich, and instead of saxaul and desert thorns in the oases, rice, cotton and various southern fruit trees grow in abundance. Dependence on moisture can be observed in Turkmenistan also in the animal world, which is richest in well-irrigated areas. An amateur hunter of large predators can even find a Bengal tiger in the thickets of rivers, not to mention a wild boar, and in the mountains - a leopard and a hyena. Turkmenistan has not yet been sufficiently researched with respect to its mineral resources. If until now their presence was known mainly in the Krasnovodsk region, such as: rock and self-precipitated salt, Glauber's salt, and on the Cheleken island - oil and various products of petroleum origin and other minerals (gypsum, coal), then Scientific research of the country has revealed its richness in other minerals, especially sulfur, which is found in large quantities in Kara-Kum - 250 kilometers north of Ashgabat. The huge territory of the CCP has only 1.030 thousand people, mainly Turkmen (77%), Uzbeks, Russians, Persians, Cossacks and representatives of other peoples. Turkmens belong to the Turkic family of peoples, and their closest relatives by blood are the Turks and the Azerbaijani Turks. Not all Turkmens live within the T S S R; they are also found in Uzbekistan, Kazakstan, part of them, the Stavropol Turk-Ris. 1. A group of Turkmen before the kibitkoy.] exchange, 200-300 years ago, they settled in the steppe north of the Caucasus, where they are now allocated to a special Turkmen region; there are also Turkmens in the Batum region and in the Crimea, but incomparably more of them are outside the USSR — in Persia, in its northeastern corner and south of the Atrek River, and in Afghanistan. In addition, about one hundred thousand Turkmens wander in Turkey, who left the borders of Central Asia several centuries ago. It is impossible to speak of the Turkmens as something homogeneous, as a people who preserved themselves from the effects of the environment. Living in different economic conditions and submitting to the influence of various neighboring peoples, the Turkmen tribes little by little acquired a number of physical, moral, cultural and everyday differences. However, the common origin, the consciousness of it by the Turkmen of different tribes, the division into tribes that persisted for centuries, regardless of the way of life and subordination to one or another state, as well as the clan system with common features, which still exists to a greater or lesser extent, and the common spiritual culture make it possible to consider all Turkmen tribes as a single nation. Particular attention is drawn to the clan structure of the Turkmen - a living relic of bygone times. Wandering in the boundless steppes of Central Asia, not dependent on anyone, but at the same time left to themselves in the matter of self-defense and the search for means of subsistence, the Turkmens were forced by life itself to a form of social cooperation known as the clan system. The main social unit is the family (a wagon, on average 4-5 people), which in its inner life does not depend on anyone; a number of male-related families form the next stage of connection — a community (for a sedentary and semi-sedentary population — a village, aul). Communities live completely independently, common affairs are decided by the whole community, and current affairs are decided by elected officials. In the absence of any privileges and general equality, the leading role is usually played by smart and energetic people. There are no princes and the title of khan was given for merit. The exit from the community is free. In case of need (war, etc.), communities merged into the following larger tribal divisions: tribes, clans and tribes. The tribe is the last degree of tribal unity; the largest of them are the following: Teke (Teke), Yomuds, Salors, Saryks, Goklans, Chaudors, Ersari, Imrels, etc., it is interesting to note that some tribes, due to the artificially drawn political border, ended up part of Russia (now in the USSR ), partly in Persia (Yomud). The absence of laws and authorities still could not free the Turkmens from the existence of a whole vast body of unwritten law that would protect personal rights, property, interests of the family, community, clan, etc. Life itself has developed the laws of customary law (adat), which governs the whole the life of the Turkmen and regulates it to the smallest detail. However, reflecting the cultural state and views of its environment, customary law, creating an internal order in society, has a lot of both cruel and uncivilized from our point of view. Customary law requires unquestioning self-submission; the one who does not obey him goes against society and therefore loses the right to protection on its part, and to be defenseless and not to have the support of his kind means to perish. It is not for nothing that the popular Turkmen wisdom threatens: "who does not fulfill the precepts of the ancestors, howl." On the contrary, relatives should always help each other; everyone's business is a common business. This explains the absence of begging among the Turkmen. On the other hand, a strict account of the degree of kinship is kept, the Turkmen value their ancestry, and each of them knows the name of the last degree of his tribal division (clan, its separation) and tribe. Since there are no courts and no punishments and there would be no one to carry them out, then retribution is the same for a criminal or civil crime is the payment of a known value to the victim. In disputed cases, they resort to arbitration, collecting respected people for this, however, their decisions are not binding on the parties. If the arbitration court is not addressed, or is not satisfied with it, then sometimes they resort to personal punishment, followed by bloody revenge. If the killer escaped, they take revenge on his brothers, relatives and his closest family up to the seventh generation. Each new murder brings a new revenge; mass destruction is created. Bloody revenge is one of the most brutal common law laws. Fortunately, the Turkmens try to avoid it by all means. However, equality among community members was not always and not always maintained. In some areas, especially within the former Khiva and Bukhara, countries that retained their eastern despotic way of life prior to their Sovietization, Turkmen tribal chiefs - feudal lords - acquired power over the local Turkmen population, who collected significant land wealth and huge herds of cattle. However, as a general rule, the Turkmens always put personal freedom and independence above all else, and only a harsh necessity unites them together. The demands of life and the environment have left a deep imprint on all life and life. comfortable way of life of the Turkmen. It is not for nothing that the Turkmen are most attached to their horse, sometimes an irreplaceable and only friend in the dead desert. Constant life among nature developed in the Turkmen submission to its laws and fatalism, on the other hand, the poverty of nature did not give much food for the development of his spiritual life. The Turkmens, who were previously only nomads, little by little settle on the earth, and now in the TSSR they are found in the form of a sedentary population, nomads and semi-nomads — in the summer of farmers, in the winter of nomads. In nomads, each tribe, clan and tribe has a certain [Fig. 2 Turkmen aul.] A territory for nomadism, while the customary law does not allow violating the accepted boundaries. Also, semi-nomads have certain places for nomads. Turkmens, transitioning to a settled life, continue to live in the same wagon as nomads, and only in places with strong outside influence (for example, Russians) the wagon is replaced by a house. Simultaneously with settling on the land, more and more Turkmens pass from cattle breeding to agriculture, the main occupation of the TSSR population. However, several decades ago and earlier in Turkmenistan, the Alamans, predatory raids on neighbors by the Tekins and other Turkmen tribes, played a known role in enriching the population. Alamans and robbers created the glory of daring and fearless robbers far around the Turkmens. For the population of some Turkmen oases, robberies and raids, mainly in the neighboring regions of Persia, where hundreds of villages were ravaged by them, and the entire border region was little - by little depopulated, was a craft from which they lived, and agriculture and cattle breeding were only subsidiary The main prey were the people whom the Turkmens sold through dealers to the slave markets of Central Asia. Since the TSSR, despite its southern position and soil fertility in the oases, is very poor in water, this poverty is the main obstacle to the development of agriculture. Sowing for rain (rain-fed) is possible only in the foothill regions, where rain falls much more than on the flat parts of the country. However, there are very few such lands (about 2 ° / 0 of the entire cultivated area). Therefore, the issue of artificial irrigation (irrigation) has always played a very important role within the TSSR. Even in ancient times, the oases of the present TSSR were densely cut by entire systems of irrigation structures, traces of which are now found in many places, now abandoned and deserted. Of the oases, the largest are the following: Akhal-Tekinsky, which stretches for 240 kilometers, lengths in the form of a narrow ribbon from Kyzyl-Arvat to Ashgabat, further to the east — Ateksky, along the Tejenu-Tezhensky river and further to the south — Serakhsky, along the Mur-gabu river— Mervsky in the north, further to the south Iolatansky and Pendinsky even further south along the river. Under Soviet rule, especially after the National Delimitation of Central Asia, much attention was paid to the irrigation in the TSSR, the republic's needs for water were studied, much has already been done, much is provided for by the irrigation plan. A number of canals, dams and other similar structures have already been built. Thanks to this, in 2 years the sown area increased by 20%, and if in the first year of the republic's existence 682 thousand rubles were allocated for irrigation, then in the next year (1926-27) it was already 4.5 million rubles. The main crops in the TSSR are: wheat, cotton (along the Tejen and Murghab rivers), corn, dzhugara, barley, oats and rice. Cotton cultivation in the TSSR is developing from year to year; this is achieved not only by increasing the area under its crops, but also by a number of agronomic and economic measures. Support and development of cotton growing in the TSSR, as in all other cotton-growing regions of the USSR, is also dictated by the USSR's desire to free itself from dependence on the West and America in supplying our industry with this important type of raw material. As for horticulture and viticulture, they, having large opportunities are not yet sufficiently developed. Sericulture is widespread in the Ashgabat region; in the TSSR, 15% of the total population is exclusively engaged in cattle breeding. Cattle breeders have fat-tailed sheep most of all, then goats, astrakhan sheep, then horses, cattle, camels, donkeys. Of the total 3.5 mln. head of livestock on the territory of the sands accounts for more than 2.7 million. heads. However, in general, the state of the cattle-breeding economy is difficult; it is carried out in an uncultured way, in the old-fashioned way and for the owners it turns out to be of little benefit. The TSSR is not an exclusively agricultural country; the industry that already exists here, despite its small size, has every reason to develop rapidly. The availability of its own raw materials (cotton, wool, leather, sulfur, oil) and remoteness from the center of industrial life of the USSR, as well as the need to strengthen the role of the local Turkmen proletariat, all this leads to the development of local industry. In the extractive industry, the first place is taken by the extraction of oil products in Cheleken island; there are also ozokerite fields; mined salt, stone corner and others. The main part of the workers is employed in the railway. workshops of the Transcaspian railway roads crossing the TSSR from west to east, from Krasnovodsk, the main port on the Caspian Sea, to the border of Uzbekistan in the east. On the two-year anniversary of the proclamation of the TSSR, a textile factory for 10 thousand spindles and a silk-winding plant were laid in Ashgabat. Other factories and factories in various industries operate on a rather modest scale. The needs of the local aul and nomadic population are largely met by handicrafts. For centuries, the Turkmens wandered in the steppes of the Trans-Caspian or occupied its oases, until Russia turned its gaze on these areas.The conquest of the Trans-Caspian is one of the parts of the Russian conquest of Central Asia, and this in turn is part of Russia's movement to the East in the 19th and 20th centuries. .c.In the Transcaspian region, Russia first became a firm foot in 1869 from the founding of Krasnovodsk, and then for 10 years further penetration to the east was prepared. Part of the Turkmens submitted to the conquerors, while the other, especially the Tekins of the Akhal-Teke oasis, began stubbornly fighting for their independence. All these ten years are filled with continuous collision In the late 70s, the Russians decided to conquer the Akhal-Tekinsky oasis, the center of the entire Transcaspian region. The first campaign in 1879 ended unsuccessfully for the Russians, so they were recaptured from the Geok-Tepe fortress (not far from present-day Ashgabat) and forced to retreat to the Caspian Sea. The news of this victory spread widely throughout Turkmenistan, but the jubilation was short-lived. The St. Petersburg government instructed the famous General Skobelev to make amends for this defeat and break the rebellious Tekins. A carefully prepared and skilfully conducted expedition ended successfully for the Russians. On January 12, 1881, Geok-Tepe was taken, despite the desperate resistance of the Turkmen, and this dealt the main and final blow to the independence of the Tekins and other Turkmen tribes. Memories of this fateful day are still alive among the Tekins. Soon the rest of the former Trans-Caspian region was occupied and, thus, the conquest of Central Asia was completed The system of Russian government, as before, tried to bring discord and division into the Turkmen population. The Russians strove to win over kulak-bays, khans and leaders to their side, bribing them by preserving the former and granting new privileges, ranks, orders, etc. Sometimes the bais and khans themselves, with flattery and sycophancy, hurried to earn the mercy of the victors. At the same time, severe measures awaited all unreliable and rebellious - imprisonment, exile, deportation to Russia, extradition of hostages, etc. The Japanese war gave impetus to awakening national consciousness among the Turkmen bourgeois elements and opened their eyes to the groundlessness of the opinion about the invincibility of Russia. During the World War, when an attempt was made to mobilize, an uprising took place among the indigenous population of Central Asia, the movement also captured Turkmenistan in two regions: agrarian clashes took place in the Merv-Tejen area and partisan attacks on Russians took place, and in the southwestern part of Turkmenistan on the border with Persia it came to open. the wars of the Yomuds with the Russians. Here, a punitive expedition of 15 thousand troops acted against the Turkmens, moreover, well equipped technically. The struggle took place both within Russia and in Persia, where the Russians ruled like at home. They beat the peaceful Yomud population, burned wagons, destroyed crops, captured livestock, robbed, and committed atrocities. The entire Yomud population along Atrek went to Persia and only after the revolution of 1917 returned back. This expedition greatly contributed to the deterioration of relations between the Turkmens and the Russians and left a deep mark on the Yomuds. Turkmen mothers frightened their children that "Madritov would come" (general, head of the expedition). The February revolution in the Caspian Sea took place without affecting the broad masses of the indigenous population, but among the representatives of two classes of Turkmen: the remnants of the feudal lords, inspired by the reactionary clergy, and the national-bourgeois the Democrats began to feud. Since the working element in the cities was weak, and besides, it was not connected through the Turkmen workers with the aul, and in the cities there was a dominance of the bureaucracy and the bourgeoisie, the Soviet power, which was established after October, fell in the summer of 1918, and was replaced by came the SS-era counter-revolutionary Transcaspian provisional government, which also relied on the Turkmen bourgeois circles. The subsequent British intervention, the main purpose of which was to assist the counter-revolution in its struggle against the Bolsheviks and to create a buffer between revolutionary Russia and the British possessions and the countries of the East subject to England, had the result that the British, welcomed by the trans-Caspian counter-revolution that relied on them, , became the de facto rulers of Turkmenistan. The ever increasing reaction led to the fact that the white government in Ashgabat lost support from the city, the nationalists lost influence among the Turkmens, and the broad masses of the dekhkans began to understand that the struggle against the Bolsheviks was directed against the interests of the dekhkans themselves. After the subsequent withdrawal of the British from the Caspian Sea, the balance at the front was upset, and as a result of the successful offensive of the Red Army, Ashgabat became Soviet again on July 9, 1919. Liberated from the British and Whites, Turkmenistan, entering the Turkestan Sov. Social The republic did not yet cover all regions of Central Asia with a Turkmen population, and this task was almost completed by the National demarcation of Central Asia and the proclamation of the Turkmen SSR on February 25, 1925. The new republic was formed from the Turkmen region of Turk. SSR, as well as from parts of Bukhara, Khorezm (Khiva) and the Kazak (formerly Kirghiz) republic and entered the USSR as an equal member together with the Russian Federation, Ukraine, Belarus, the Transcaucasian Federation and Uzbekistan. The city of Poltoratsk (now called Ashgabat), the largest center of the country, was declared the capital of the new republic. Although much has already been achieved in building Soviet power after the final reconciliation of the country, after the expulsion of the Whites and the destruction of all traces of Basmachism, especially noticeable successes achieved only after the national demarcation of Central Asia and the creation of the TSSR, when the planned Sovietization of the country and its unification into a single state whole became possible. It should not be forgotten that before the Russian conquest, the Turkmen actually did not know any power over themselves, and each tribe and clan lived completely independently, and within the clans the khan] had no great rights. Also, after the Russian conquest, areas farther from the administrative and cultural centers, especially the female cattle breeding areas, remained, due to their inaccessibility, completely or almost completely independent. In the northeastern outskirts of the TSSR, to this day, a well-known role is played by the feudal leaders, who only gradually completely submitted to Soviet power. Some inland areas have not yet been sufficiently explored and even last year in Kara-Kum by a geological expedition, just like the land. Within the clan division, land and water were divided into household-hereditary (mulk) and communal (sanashik) with an annual redistribution; the allotment was given only to married people, thanks to which the rich tried as soon as possible to get their son engaged and get land and water for him. During redistributions, due to the pursuit of justice, a very large strip of land and far-away land turned out, as a result of which many farmers abandoned their land or leased it, and the land hereditary homesteads meanwhile turned into property and were concentrated in few hands. As a result of all this, the number of landless, land-poor, tenants and large landowners grew. In addition, some clans had a lot of land and water, others had little. At the end of 1925, the Central Executive Committee of the TSSR decided to carry out a reform first in two districts of the TSSR, and then it covered other parts of the republic. The results of the reform are as follows: in places with a sedentary population, a strong blow has been dealt to the clan system, since labor land use has been put in place of the clan; a certain land area and water sources are assigned to each aul, and each farm has been given allotments of land and water to the hereditary household. Thus, the Turkmen aul ceases to be an exclusively generic unit and becomes an economic unit, and an irreparable blow is inflicted on blood relations. At the same time, the marriage rights to land and water have been destroyed. Several thousand landless Dekhkan farms received land and water, another several thousand farms were given a cut at the expense of kulaks and multi-land, in which the size of the land was reduced to the established norm. As a result of all the previous measures, especially the land and water reform, the poor and middle peasant strata of the dekhkanstvo were finally and firmly won over to their side by the Soviet government, which is viewed by these strata of dekhkans as the expression of their will and interests. An important role in Soviet construction in the auls is played by the "Koshchi" union - the unification of the rural poor and farm laborers, led by party organizations. The class policy of the Soviet government is directed against tribal survivals and tribal division of the working population, and economic measures are the best ways to combat them. The development of industry in the TSSR will lead to the growth of the local Turkmen proletariat, which, although continuously growing in number, is still small and reaches only 13.2% with a total number of the proletariat of about 11 thousand people, concentrated mainly in several points (Ashgabat, Krasnovodsk , Kyzyl-Arvat, New Chardzhui, Merv) and mainly consisting of Russians. Therefore, one of the main tasks of the party is to create a sufficiently strong indigenous proletarian active. In the TSSR, the cities are not purely Turkmen, but rather even Russian; this is explained by historical reasons, since the cities were built by the Russians as strongholds of their dominion over the country. On the other hand, the Turkmen did not have their own intelligentsia, as a result of which in representatives of the non-indigenous population of the country took a significant part in the construction of the young Turkmen republic. However, the indigenization of the Soviet apparatus is going well and more than 28% of the Turkmens are already working in it. Enormous tasks are facing the Soviet government in the matter of the people's and cultural education of the TSSR and in the matter of health care. Before the October Revolution, the Turkmen did not have a national secular school at all, there were either Russian-Turkmen or Muslim religious schools. With the establishment of Soviet power, especially after the formation of a separate Turkmen republic, the People's Commissariat of Education faced the task of eliminating illiteracy and spreading education in the country; while on the part of the population there is a feverish impulse to learn. For three years (since 1924) the number of students has increased 4 times; now there are not enough schools for everyone who wants to study. A number of special technical schools and pedagogical institutes have been opened in Ashgabat and other cities, which should give Turkmenistan its indigenous cultural strength. The Turkmen Scientific Research Institute was opened, with the goal of a comprehensive study of the TSSR. Great tasks were faced by the Turkmen language, which now has to serve not a poor nomad, but the people set by the October Revolution on a par with the most cultured peoples of the USSR. The inconvenient Arabic alphabet was replaced by the Latin alphabet, which is also accepted by other Turkic peoples of the USSR. Condemned under the old regime to physical and moral extinction, the Turkmen nation began to awaken and develop.