1. Uzbekistan after the national-state demarcation of Central Asia, General outline of the country.
In 1925, an event of significant historical importance took place in the life of the USSR. The colossal expanse of Central Asian thousand-verst steppes and deserts, revitalized by rare green islands of ancient cities and villages, this whole huge, multi-tribal, half of Western Europe, country, which conquered Soviet power already in 1917, after 8 years was divided into several national states in which the vital energy of the peoples of Central Asia will henceforth be concentrated. As a result of this, carried out mainly by the efforts of our party, the great transformation, two new independent republics were created - the Uzbek and the Turkmen, two autonomous republics: the Kyrgyz and Tajik and one autonomous region - the Kara-Kalpak ... Tajiks and two autonomous regions - Kyrgyz and Kara-Kalpak. Born under such circumstances in 1925, Uzbekistan, bordering from the north with the Republic of Kazakov and the Kara-Kalpak autonomous region, in the east with mountainous Kyrgyzstan and even more mountainous Tajikistan, in the south with Afghanistan and in the west with Turkmenistan, lies 3 thousand kilometers from Moscow. It lies beyond the sandy seas and deserts, but one of the most important and full-blooded steel veins of our state body, starting at the heart of the Union, completely destroys this remoteness. The steel path going through Samara to Orenburg, passing the grassy steppe of the Orenburg province, enters the burned the sun of Kazakhstan and, bypassing the slopes of the beautiful Mugodzhar mountains, invades the sandy seas, only very weakly revitalized by the wide and long river Syr Darya. Cutting straight through them for a thousand miles and bypassing the shores of the Aral Sea and swampy lakes, our train approaches the city of Turkestan, in which the desert of the steppes alternates with the often found small areas of irrigated fields and poplar groves. Here, at the Arys River, branches off to the east along this river the Semirechenskaya railway, which is being built for 600 kilometers x). This is also a link in the construction of the Siberian railway by Turkestan. From this link, a branch will grow, which, according to the project, will reach the huge Issyk-Kul Lake, lying at the Chinese border. In 12 hours we come to the Kazy-Kurt Mountains, behind which Uzbekistan lies. The train goes up the mountains. It takes about two hours to get to Tashkent, the main center of education and economic life of Uzbekistan; the capital, Samarkand, is still 400 miles away. The route from Tashkent to Samarkand follows the middle of the three, once politically divided countries that make up the Uzbek Republic. To the left of the railway track, a few dozen versts, mountains rise, behind which lies the entire Fergana surrounded and hidden by them, and to the west and south of the capital 'Samarkand district will go the lands of the third Uzbek country, Bukhara. First, let's look at Fergana. High mountain ranges, encircling from four sides, they close this country from the rest of the world, making it a natural fortress of gigantic proportions, an area of ​​120 thousand square miles, 400 miles from north to south, more than 300 miles from west to east. Its southern wall is the highest, the Alai mountain range covered with eternal ice and snow, behind which lies the mountainous country of Pamir, divided between Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan - “The Roof of the World”. The eastern wall, the Fergana mountain range, approaches Alai at the corner abutting against China. Through the northern double mountain wall to go to Kazakhstan, and only the western wall forms a gate through which flows out of Fergana, which is born in it, a wide one and a half thousand miles running along the sands to the Aral Sea, the Syr-Darya river, along the bank of which through the same the gate creeps into Fergana by a railway. Anyone who has the opportunity to get better acquainted with Central Asian nature, so unlike our Russian one, it is better to go to Fergana not on this train. and along the old caravan route Aulie-ata-Namangan, which runs along the valley of the Talas River. Near the town of Aulie-ata, he will see on his way a wonderful picture of the breakthrough of a raging river through the rather high Cha-Archinsky mountains. Talas here runs in one channel across the entire width of the gorge, between black, bare shale rocks that rise steeply a thousand feet above the river, barely leaving room for the path we pass to Fergana. Rare small islands with dense, bright greenery amidst the raging mass of Talas waters, in the gloomy setting of the highest cliffs, glisten in the sun like emeralds in a silver frame. We leave the gorge. No sooner had the gloomy abyss of the mountains moved away than a completely different picture unfolded before our eyes. The entire right bank of Talas and the valley lying behind it, right up to the foothills receding into the distance, are covered with motley pieces of irrigated fields, often cut by water veins-ditches, which are still being drained from Talas. Several tens of miles our way goes through these fields. But now, on the almost forever blue sky, the horizon rises and grows a bluing mountain range with bright white snows. Behind them lies it Fergana. Coming out of the gorge, the path goes along a high mountain range, along the banks of the Chatkal River descending into the Fergana Valley. The descent of this river is four times steeper than the famous Finnish Imatra waterfall. In the majestic setting of mountains topped with snow, near which clouds constantly converge and then scatter, clinging to the cliffs, under a bright blue sky, the Chatkal valley, which we pass, flaunts with its fresh greenery, light with silver foam, a fast river flowing through poplar groves. Here, we are already in Fergana, not far from the tract "Thousands of keys" (Ming-bulak), where twelve centuries ago there was a summer pasture of the Turkish khans, when, coming out of the Chinese borders close from here, the Turkish people slowly moved to the West. Now here live, who came in ancient times from the Siberian forests and mountains of the Kyrgyz, formerly called wild-stone Kyrgyz. In general, at the foot of the wild, majestic mountains that surround Fergana from the north, east and south, near the black forests descending from the heights, here and there the scattered felt yurts (tents) of the Kyrgyz are whitewashed, which is why these places belong to the neighboring Kyrgyz Republic, and the Fergana valley located below the foothills, with an area of ​​20 thousand square miles, inhabited by Uzbeks and is part of the Uzbek Republic. We stayed with you in the foothills, towering over this wide valley of Fergana, which now lies at our feet. ' Here it is, visible in the distance about thirty too far. On the gray-yellow canvas of sandy and saline steppes, now almost devoid of vegetation, here and there light and dark green spots can be seen. These spots are (tiled lands, the result of the hard work of the Uzbek peasant. They huddle over a thin and dense network of water veins that make up large and small irrigation systems, without which no life is possible in the local desert, sun-burned sandy steppes. Such, surrounded by deserts lying, living places are called oases. In general, each of the large oases, enclosing a city or a large village (in Uzbek, "kishlak", that is, "wintering", since earlier, roaming the steppes, spring, summer and autumn, in the village the Uzbek only hibernated), looks like this in Uzbekistan: there are comparatively large areas along the outer edge of the oasis (x) separate areas of unenclosed fields sown with wheat, barley, rice (sown in the mud formed by grooves - "irrigation ditches"), alfalfa (forage: grass), cotton, madder (a plant from which a strong red dye is extracted). As you get closer to the center of the oasis, individual plots of land become smaller, but with better plowing and irrigation. Fields begin to come across, fenced with low, one and a half arshins high, clay fences, from behind which a mulberry tree, poplar and other trees rise, and vegetables (melons, watermelons, carrots and onions), tobacco and occasionally vineyards join the crops ... Farther to the center, there are almost no unenclosed fields; each individual plot is lined with a large number of trees in one or two rows. There is a mulberry tree and a tall poplar, a spreading elm and a walnut, and other local trees. Bread plants are almost completely replaced by melons, vineyards, alfalfa; on the road more and more often there are carts - carts on two huge, taller than human, wheels, people riding on donkeys, foot and horse; on the sides at every step you can see gardens with vineyards, pomegranates, apple trees, pears, various varieties of plums, tall and slender poplars, elm, nuts and mulberries. Finally, the city itself begins. On both sides of the narrow streets, which sometimes do not allow two carts to move apart, there are yellow-gray, adobe walls of one-story, for the most part, houses with flat earthen roofs, without a single window to the street; the same adobe fences; low and small gates Near them, in the street dust, small groups of half-naked, grimy, but pretty children of both sexes are playing. Among the colorful and noisy crowds of the narrow street, there are very few Uzbek women, compared to men. The reason for this peculiar phenomenon we will learn when we get to know the population As far as the general features of the layout of its small and large oases, which are its cities and villages, are the same in Uzbekistan, the nature surrounding human habitation is so diverse, a piece that we have already seen when following the caravan route from Kazakhstan to Fergana. passages, mountain ranges are replaced at their feet by cheerfully 'colorful squares of fields, and beyond them now begin, seemingly endless, lifeless deserts scorched by the merciless sun, dangerous for travelers. In them, huge, several fathoms high, sand waves give way to white saline plains, and behind them, one after another, as far as the eye can see, hiding sand waves, a general phenomenon that reigns throughout Uzbekistan, remains an extraordinary poverty of water. Above the fertile soil of the country, aridity gravitates and man hardly tears its chains, shackling the rich productivity of the land. The eastern part of the country, Fergana, which we have placed, is in relatively happy conditions, since the mountain ring in which it is enclosed feeds the land with streams and rivers. But here the land plots are smaller. Adjacent to the giant walls Fergana from south-west the capital Samarkand district, is irrigated by nature only in narrow strips along the slopes of the high Turkestan mountain range, and along the banks of the river, which is born in the eternal snows. Zeravshan, near Samarkand itself, branched into small rivulets, from which a dense network of canals-ditches is diverted. Outside this aquifer, a wild desert dominates, turning in the north, within the Kazan limits, into the Hungry Steppe, terrible for travelers, called by the local peoples "Bedpak-Dala," that is, the unfortunate steppe. The Zeravshan River, whose name in Russian means "gold-bearing", carrying moisture and extremely precious silt for crops for 700 miles across the dry lands, is really gold-bearing for the mountain valley of Tajikistan and for the Uzbek districts - Samarkand, Zeravshan and Bukhara , where most of the Uzbek people live. Along the same main life artery of the country are located: the capital of the republic, the ancient city of Samarkand that existed several centuries before our era, populous Bukhara, once the capital of a special state and the ancient cities of the country Katta-Kurgan (ie "Great Fortress"), Penjkent (meaning "Five cities") and others. The second center of the country is Tashkent, which lies outside the basin of the "Gold-bearing river", in the basin of another great river Sr. Asia-Syr-Darya, also in antiquity is not inferior to our Kiev. By the way, oddly enough, a number of peoples who lived almost 1000 years ago near Kiev and in general in southern Russia now live within Uzbekistan. Such peoples include the Polovtsy or Kipchaks, who inhabited most of the present-day Ukraine, as well as the Volzhsk-Don steppes. Some of them moved to Hungary, some to Georgia and Bulgaria, and the rest were greatly weakened by the Mongol invasion, and then squeezed out by the Russian conquests. Now the Kipchaks make up a noticeable part of the Uzbek people. Let us also note the Kara-Kalpaks known in Kievan Rus under the name of "black hoods" who migrated to Asia and now live in the Khorezm district of Uzbekistan (formerly Khiva), and the main arr. in its national autonomous region. Finally, part of the Khazar tribe lives in Uzbekistan, the alleged descendants of the great Khazar people who once inhabited southern and partly central Russia, part of which, breaking away from the main mass, went to the North. Persia.

2. Population, its ethnic and social composition and economy let us now dwell on the main people of the country of interest to us. The four million Uzbek people, together with their neighbors - Kyrgyz, Kyrgyz-Cossacks, Turkmens, Kara-Kalpaks, whose republics are part of the USSR, with foreign neighbors, Dungans and Uighurs, inhabiting Western China, as well as together with Tatars, Chuvashes, Meshcheryaks, Bashkirs Yakuts, Altai, Khakass, Azerbaijanis, Turks, P'olus-Slavic Bulgarians and Balkars, belongs to the forty-five million family of Turkish-Tatar or Turkic peoples, of which about thirty million are part of our Union, being in it the second largest national group after the Slavic, to which owns Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians. The total number of the Uzbek people does not reach up to four million, of which 3.200.000 live within their republic, about half a million outside the USSR, Afghanistan, and about 200 thousand in neighboring Turkmenistan and Tajikistan. Uzbekistan is a country , exclusively agriculture, and, as an economic unit, is primarily a raw material base oh in the economy of our entire Union. The existing insignificant factory industry served earlier, again, the industrial industry of Russia in the form of the initial processing of products intended for it; only now, gradually enlarging and developing the local industry, the Soviet construction of the republic has in mind the creation of its own industry in the future.In the restoration process that began in 1923, the main attention was naturally directed to the cotton ginning and oil-processing industry, without which the expansion of cotton growing would be impossible the products of which are intended for export require preliminary local industrial processing. In parallel with this, at the same time they began to restore the old 'and create new industries. By the tenth anniversary of October, the industry of Uzbekistan, in terms of the value of its gross output, had leveled 100 percent with the pre-war level, and immediately after that began to outgrow the old norm. From the extractive industry, the main attention is paid to the fuel industry, which, due to the natural wealth of the Fergana region's subsoil (oil is developed in the dyasti fields, coal in the rich Kyzyl-Kiy mines), provides a solid base for industrialization. Striving for the transition to the cheapest and perfect form of energy, in view of the presence of natural data, the basis for the start of extensive work on the electrification of Uzbekistan. Uzbekistan is predominantly an agricultural republic. In it the predominant part of the cotton plantations of Central Asia is concentrated. It also contains the bulk of the area under grain and cereals, as well as gardens and vineyards. At the same time, the area of ​​cotton plantations in the Tashkent and Fergana regions of the republic exceeds the area of ​​cereal by 41/2 and 3fg times. The following comparative table shows in percentage the proportion of crops in the pre-war period and in ours (see table, next page). shows that in our time the area of ​​cotton plantations in relation to the entire sown area of ​​the republic has expanded, in some places, even twice as compared to the pre-war period, although the amount of land under cotton is now slightly (10-12 percent) and less than the pre-war period. This is mainly explained by the reduction in the total sown area of ​​the country, due to the incomplete completion of work to restore the country's complex irrigation system, which was significantly destroyed and fell into complete decline during the civil war (from 1920 or rather 1917 and the beginning of 1923). Rebuilt in 1926, the powerful Bozsuy hydroelectric power station quickly moved forward the restoration of the crop area, which contributed to the expansion of the plantation by 1/3, during the same year. Land reclamation associations concerned with improving the quality of care and processing increased from 51 to 124. About 600 tractors were already operating in the fields of the country. The indigenous inventory (catmen, i.e., a hoe, a pick, a wooden plow, a chamois instead of a scythe, etc.) was replaced by the European one by 11%, which was greatly facilitated by the rapid growth of the agronomic network since the national demarcation of Wed. Asia in 1925. Another, which took place in the same 1925, the most important event in the life of the country - the land reform was carried out in this way. The remnants of serfdom that did not survive before the reform led to (the fact that the Baysko-kulak elements of the city and kishlak gathered up to The bondage of all cultivated land, with the simultaneous lack of land and landlessness of the main mass of the peasant population. The main reason for the establishment of ugly land relations in Uzbekistan was the penetration of Russian capital there and its influence on the development of the cotton economy. The system of broad credit, the rapid growth of the layer of intermediaries that became numerous, the exploitation of dehkan consumers through grain operations, land shortages with a significant population density in cotton-growing regions - all this caused the appearance of a local capitalist-merchant, a bai, who took over significant land plots and turned land rent into commercial and usurious capital. and middle man some part of the dekhkanship followed the path of taking over land and living and dead implements. The stratification of dekhkans was significant. The overwhelming mass of poor peasants, agricultural laborers, landless peasants who worked with Bai tools, received only a third, or even a quarter of the harvest, was formed. How the Eemreform affected the country's peasant plots is shown by the following tablet (see table, next page). Of course, there are still many poor peasants today. One-tenth of all farms in the country belong to non-sown (in the central regions. The share of low-sown (with an allotment of no more than one tithe) accounts for a third of all farms in the country, while in Fergana 43% are low-sown. , represent half of the entire peasantry. Large dekhkan farms, with sowing more than 4 dess.-7%. Zeravshan region is in a more favorable position, it has pastures, so the peasantry there managed to save livestock. In Fergana and Tashkent the ruin of the overwhelming mass of the peasantry occurred much faster. That is why the peasantry of Uzbekistan is so poor in working cattle. A third of all farms do not have it at all; a third has one head each, a quarter has two heads, and only a tenth of 3-4 and more heads.In Fergana, about half of the peasantry; (46%) do not have draft animals at all.; Taking care of eliminating such poverty with animals needed in the economy, the government of the republic, in addition to providing funds and supplies I am on preferential terms, dehkan, I mean the wide distribution of the correct formulation of cattle breeding. For this purpose, a splendidly equipped Zootechnical Institute was opened in 27 AD. Due to the wide spread of silkworm breeding in the country, significant numbers of dehkans, especially women, are engaged in crafts related to it - silk-weaving and silk-weaving. About 25 thousand handicraftsmen are united by trade cooperation, as well as about 12% of other handicraftsmen, making up about one and a half thousand people. The importance of the handicraft industry in Uzbekistan is explained by the fact that its products still slightly exceed the products of the local state industry. Its cooperation is going well; suffice it to say that in one financial year 1925-26, the industrial cooperation of Uzbekistan increased in number by 50%.