1. General outline of the ABSSR.
The Autonomous Bashkir Socialist Soviet Republic is located on the eastern outskirts of the European part of the USSR in the basin of the Belaya and Ural rivers. The borders of the ABSSR are: from the north and east - the Ural region, from the south - Orenburg province, from the west - Samara province. and the Tatar ASSR. According to the surface arrangement, the edge can be divided into three parts. The most important of them, the Ural Upland, consists of a rather complex group of ridges, largely covered with forest, and represents a relatively sharp contrast with the other two — the steppe Trans-Ural in the east and the hilly valley of the Cis-Urals in the west. Of the rivers flowing in the territory of the Bashkir Republic, the most significant is the r. White, wholly owned by the country; like most others, it is only shipable in parts. The eastern and northern parts of the country are rich in shallow lakes, while the entire southern part is irrigated almost exclusively by the system of tributaries of the river. Ural. The lakes of the Trans-Ural steppe abound in fish of some industrial importance. The climate of the country is rather temperate, with some features of a continental character — very high temperatures in summer and just as low — in winter. The average winter temperature is below -15 °, and summer is above -21 °. Due to the climatic features of the region, two types of winds should be noted: the so-called storm and dry wind. The steppe part of the country is most susceptible to the blizzard. In winter, a blizzard causes great harm to the population. A suddenly rising wind blows with terrible force, sometimes for several days. The cattle that are on grazing and caught in the steppe by such a hurricane run tens of miles in the wind and die in masses, falling into ravines and falling from exhaustion. The dry wind, the southeastern summer wind, is distinguished by exceptional dryness and heat, which adversely affects the crops. The exceptional richness of the ABSSR vegetation is due to the great complexity of the relief and the corresponding variety of climatic conditions. The mountainous landscape is replete with pine needles, while the entire western foothills are covered with deciduous forests. Forests cover about 37% of the total area. The ABSSR also owes its diversity of geographical conditions to its fauna; huge forests, mountains and steppes give shelter to thousands of different animals. The largest inhabitant of the forests is the elk, which is extremely popular for winter ski hunting. There are also several breeds of deer and roe deer, and small game animals - squirrel, marten, ermine, weasel, ferret. (An interesting characteristic feature of the Bashkir fauna is the joint presence of polar tundra animals with some typical representatives of the steppe zone of southern Russia. The former include the ptarmigan and reindeer, the latter — the marmot, little bustard, etc.). The ABSSR covers an area of ​​157.662 sq. kya. with a population of 21/2 million. In terms of population density, the ABSSR can be attributed to the number of moderately populated areas (there are 16 people per one square klya). Although the tribal composition of the population is quite complex, the indigenous inhabitants of the region are Bashkirs; they, together with their kindred Tatars, Meshcheryaks and Votyaks, make up 53.75% of the total population, and, like the most ancient inhabitants of the country, are widespread. The rest of the population in percentage terms is drawn as follows: Great Russians — 34.35%, Ukrainians — 3.0%, Mari — 2.91D, Chuvash — 2.8%, Mordovians — 1.8%, Belarusians — 1.1%, others 2.3%. It is difficult to establish the exact time of the settlement of the Bashkirs in the Urals region. It is only known that in the 9th century they already lived there. The Bashkirs are a people of mixed Mongol-Finnish origin. The annexation of Bashkiria to Russia dates back to the middle of the 16th century. When annexed, the Bashkirs had to experience the usual program of enslavement with all the phenomena characteristic of the colonial policy of that time. The "insignificant tax" imposed on the newly conquered country by the Moscow government triggered a desperate protest of the population, expressed in a series of uprisings, followed by brutal reprisals (the number of large, organized uprisings reaches 80). The first uprising broke out in 1645 under the slogan of restoring national independence. This was the beginning of a bloody and unequal struggle that lasted for more than a century and a half. The Bashkirs "rebelled" incessantly and incessantly they were beaten by the ten thousand Kalmyk freemen organized and incited by the tsarist government. Invading the country, she plundered and burned villages, slaughtered the inhabitants and drove away women and cattle.In the Peter's era, the ruin of the country becomes systematic and reaches colossal proportions, by plundering land and forests. The answer is the uprising of 1735, which lasted 6 years. Up to 30 thousand Bashkirs were executed, sent to hard labor, enslaved with their families. By a series of government decrees, the Bashkirs within their country were placed in incredibly difficult conditions in relation to the Meshcheryaks and Tatars, who were given the best Bashkir lands as their property. The fictitious self-government was destroyed, and all the power to govern the country was transferred to the hands of Russian officials, who finally ruined the remnants of the indigenous Bashkirs through impudent abuses and predatory policies. Thus, the Bashkirs, the legitimate owners of the region, were, in fact, outlawed and, living on their territory, in fact, deprived of all rights, almost even the right to exist. But the people set on the path of extinction did not surrender, and rose two more times, trying with their last strength to throw off the royal yoke. The Pugachev movement was the last. The ethnic strife sown by the tsarist policy played a role: the Tatars, Meshcheryaks and Votyaks supported the tsarist troops, and the attempt ended in a terrible slaughter. More than 50,000 Bashkirs fled in whole families to the Kyrgyz steppes. While the “liquidation” of the Bashkirs was successfully unfolding in the country, the tsarist government took a “diplomatic step” by placing the wives and children of the fugitives at the disposal of the Kirghiz. The agreement took place. The Bashkirs were partly killed, partly given over to the Russians. This is, in general terms, the mournful chronicle of the heroic struggle of the Bashkirs for liberation. From that time on, the population ceases to actively participate in the events: it retreats to the mountains of the Southern Urals, away from the military-industrial centers of Russian culture, and leads a closed existence there. The abolition of serfdom caused a new plunder of the Bashkir lands. When delimiting, the norms of allotments are reduced, due to which the resettlement of the Great Russian peasantry from the densely populated central provinces is carried out. Bashkir clans are finally attached to their location and placed under the authority of zemstvo chiefs. Even mullahs are approved by the authorities, and theological schools are subordinate to the synod. The national movement froze completely, although during the entire 19th century. individual collisions and excesses occur. It is clear that under these conditions there is no need to talk about the possibility for the Bashkirs of any kind of cultural progress. The ban on the construction of schools and mosques further strengthened the situation. Not wanting to learn from their enslavers, the people lost even the beginnings of their own tribal culture, submitting to the conditions of the changed life. The development of industry in the country not only did not improve their situation, but on the contrary: the capital that came, accompanied by the most terrible exploitation of the population, and the transfer of the country's best natural resources into the hands of the newcomer, produced a pernicious and destructive effect. The old forms and methods of economic management collapsed, not presenting the possibility of an easy transition to new ones. And so it happened that the Bashkir, being forced into the interior of the country, cut off from the best lands and holdings, was condemned to starvation and extinction. Therefore, the only progress in the country was a monstrously progressive mortality rate. This was the 'state of the country, inherited by the Soviet regime from tsarism. Until the middle of the last century, the Bashkirs remained primarily cattle breeders. The vast expanses of virgin lands represented magnificent pastures, making it easy to maintain herds of thousands. Despite the fact that for a long time each uprising cost the Bashkirs thousands of cattle, even before the decline in the country's economic well-being began, a simple Bashkir had 30-40 horses, and many rich people had a figure of one and a half, two thousand. Such a number of horses in an individual Bashkir farm was explained by the fact that the horse was the only way to travel in the country, and its meat and milk were the main food. Cattle in purely Bashkir farms are still less important in personal consumption, and dairy farming pursues mainly industrial goals — the trade in butter. Despite the importance of cattle breeding in the life of a Bashkir, cattle are kept in an ancient nomadic way: herds and herds of Bashkirs are grazed all year round. Livestock care does not exist in the usual sense. Approximately from April to October, the nomadic movement lasts, that is, the slow movement of cattle across the steppe; the wandering place is usually chosen as far from the dwelling as possible in order to preserve the grass for wintering. In winter, the herds, left to their own devices, somehow extract grass from under the snow, endure terrible blizzards, and starve and die in the icy conditions. from cattle breeding as from the main occupation. Ancillary trades — hunting and fishing — declined, as did cattle breeding, and for the same reasons. Gradually settling and moving away from nomadic life, the Bashkirs switched to agriculture. But the difficulty of this adaptation, associated with a radical breakdown of all centuries-old skills and traditions, was so great that it seemed that the Bashkirs were generally incapable of agriculture. Extremely characteristic is the ironic remark of one ethnographer that "behind the sowing Bashkir a horse with a birch tied to its tail is dragging its branches, the branches of which are somehow swept by the grain." This is partly true when applied to the past.But after all, the transition is complete. The Bashkirs became farmers. True, until now, agriculture in any Bashkir village is much more primitive than in the neighboring Great Russian. Along with the threefields, there is even a fallow system in some places. After a single plowing with a heavy wooden saban, sowing is carried out, often even without boron; 'forging. Bread is threshed by horses trampling sheaves, or by a cart loaded with stones, which; 'They carry back and forth in sheaves. One of the oldest subsidiary trades was beekeeping, especially in the mountain-forest part, where each family had boards hanging from the trees. These are the main occupations of the Bashkirs. Their dwellings are different: -in the mountain-forest part it is , for the most part, log buildings, often of the log type, while in the steppe - felt; huts, dugouts, semi-dugouts and adobe huts. Household utensils are very simple. The dishes are almost exclusively wooden, partly bast. The steppe Bashkirs still have leather. It is characteristic that pottery is not at all used by the Bashkirs. Dairy and flour dishes, mainly boiled ones, prevail in the food of the Bashkirs. Bread is being replaced by flat cakes and pancakes — baked or boiled .. Meat, which until recently was the main food product (dried and dried horse meat, partly beef), is found almost exclusively among the rich. Vegetables are eaten only in the western and northwestern parts of Bashkiria. An industrial bias on the farm reduces the consumption of poultry and dairy products, but tea, which is very popular with the Bashkirs, is extremely common. According to their religious views, the Bashkirs are Muslims. In remote corners, where beliefs are especially primitive, they have the character of a mixture of Muslim cult with the rudiments of Orthodoxy and primitive shamanism. Mullah was the highest person in the village. Spiritual father and mediator between people and God, he was a miracle worker, doctors and teacher. Events such as dry wind, hailstorms, and the death of livestock made the inhabitants turn to him. At school, the Bashkirs met the same mullah. The tsarist government allowed only theological schools - "mekteb". On top of this, throughout Bashkiria there were 2-3 gymnasiums for the "privileged" and Russian schools, in which they tried to erase the very memory of the Bashkir language. But the "mekteb" with his mullah was also under the jurisdiction of the synod. A feature of the social structure of the Bashkirs is the presence of very strong and very durable remnants of the family life. The clan life existed for them for an extremely long time, having the clan in the role of the main social unit, headed by the eldest in the clan. Under the influence of historical conditions, the clans gradually split into smaller groups, sub-clans ("tyuby"), repeating in general terms the clan structure. In the 18th century. childbirth gradually disappears. By a decree in 1739, management was transferred to volost foremen, who were appointed by the regional administration. But the demarcation of the land, the allocation of the so-called. "Dachas", that is, separate plots of land in the joint possession of a whole "tyuba", stopped further fragmentation, turning the "tyuba" into a geographically separate group, economically and by kinship, and sometimes consisting of several villages "Tyuba" ob ' unites "ares" —groups of families that have survived almost everywhere. Marriage within the arena is considered unacceptable. In family events, not only the family takes part, but the whole "ara", helping the groom pay the ransom for the bride ("kalym"), participating in the organization of the commemoration, etc. "It should be noted that neither the" ara " nor are the "tyuba" united by the person at the head of them, but only consist of separate independent families — this is their fundamental difference from the untouched clan structure. ”It is characteristic that the members of the“ area ”differ among themselves not by the degree of kinship, and by age: on the elders - fathers, uncles, mothers, and the younger ones - brothers, relatives and cousins, sisters, etc. There are a number of ancestral traditions that the Bashkirs hold tightly. Such are, for example, an unusually interesting and peculiar marriage ceremony , the national spring festival "Sabantuy", accompanied by horse races and wrestling competitions, in some places preserved falconry. This is a household tribute to the past of the country. A number of fundamental differences in the way of life have the inhabitants of the Bor canton and the western part of the Ufa. , bash the kirs of this region have gone much further along the path of the disintegration of the tribal life; the strongest ancestral traditions are almost erased here. A very important occupation of the population is gardening, which is almost not observed in other places. This exclusion once again confirms the dependence of the general life picture of the region on the geographical location of individual parts, the proximity of cultural centers and their nature.